Title : Anuranjan Jha vs Aam Admi Party on 15 April, 2015 IN THE COURT OF DINESH KUMAR SHARMA, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE, PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI. C.R. No. : 63/15 Unique Case ID no. : 02403R0043202015 Title : Anuranjan Jha, R/o.D­201, Jansattta Apartment, Sector­9, Vasundhara, Ghaziabad, U.P. .... Petitioner Vs. 1. Aam Admi Party, Through : National Secretary Pankaj Gupta, 41, Hanuman Road, Parliament Street. 2. Arvind Kejriwal, 41, Hanuman Road, Parliament Street. 3. Manish Sisodia, 41, Hanuman Road, Parliament Street. 4. Yogendra Yadav, 41, Hanuman Road, Parliament Street. 5. Kumar Vishwas, 41, Hanuman Road, Parliament Street. C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 1 / 15 6. Shazia Ilmi, 41, Hanuman Road, Parliament Street. ... Respondents Date of Institution : 05.3.2015 Date of reserving order : 08.04.2015 Date of pronouncement : 15.04.2015 (Appearances) Ms. Sakie Jakharia, Ld. Counsel for the petitioner. Sh. Rishikesh Kumar, Ld. Counsel for the respondents. ORDER 1. Vide this order I propose to dispose of revision petition filed under Section 397 Cr.P.C. against impugned order dated 14.11.2014 in Complaint Case bearing No. 273/1/13 filed under Section 499 / 500 IPC r/w Section 200 of the Cr.P.C. whereby Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate dismissed the complaint filed by the complainant against the respondents for the offence under Section 499 / 500 IPC. The petitioner being aggrieved of the impugned order, challenged the same on the ground that order passed by the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate is manifestly, wrong, incorrect and suffers from procedural irregularity as based on improper appreciation of facts. 2. The perusal of trial court record indicates that complainant had filed the present complaint on 29.11.2013 C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 2 / 15 against the respondents stating therein that he is well known and reputed journalist and has an honourable standing in the media fraternity. The complainant is the promoter and owner of a website portal known as MediaSarkar.com. Accused no. 1 is a registered political party and accused no. 2 to 6 are its executive members and office bearers of the said political party. The complainant conducted a sting operation on the representatives of the said political party and same was released on 21.11.2013 on the complaint's web portal. Allegedly, accused persons started making deliberately malicious averments against the complainant, which were defamatory and derogatory in nature, in order to assassinate the reputation of the complainant and to lower his status in the eyes of general public at large. The allegations made by the accused persons were false and untrue. The accused persons allegedly started its propaganda on various news channels and impugned involvement of the complainant with different political parties as an attempt to harm the goodwill, reputation and credibility of the complainant. The complainant, in its complaint, has reproduced the said defamatory and derogatory averments made by accused no. 2 on official twitter. Similarly, accused no. 3 made certain accusation in a press conference held on 24.11.2013. Accused no. 4 also make certain C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 3 / 15 accusations reproduced in complaint, in press conference held on 24.11.2013. Accused no. 5 also allegedly made certain accusations while participating in Prime Time debate on Times Now (News Channel) on 22.11.2013. Accused no. 6 also made false statement during a debate on Total TV on 21.11.2013. Along with the complaint, the complainant has filed list of witnesses mentioning therein the names of Mr. Priyaranjan Kumar, Mr. Pushkar Dutt, Mr. Kaushalesh Thakur and Mr. Gyan Prakash and as proposed witnesses for the complainant. Upon filing of the complaint on 29.11.2013 the matter was adjourned to 19.12.2013. On 19.12.2013 the complainant examined himself as CW­1 and closed his evidence by way of statement recorded on the same day. The matter kept on adjourning for more than 9 months and eventually on 14.11.2014, the complaint was dismissed by Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate. 3. It would be advantageous to reproduce para no. 18 to para no. 23, which are the operative part of the impugned order. The same are as under:­ "18. The term 'character' & 'reputation' are prone to be confused. 'Character' is what a person actually is and 'reputation' is what neighbours say, what he is. Thus, though a man may C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 4 / 15 have, in fact a good character, yet he may suffer from a bad reputation or vice versa. 'Reputation' is the common knowledge of the community or a general opinion in respect of a person. Reputation implies the definite and formal opinion of the community. Character also includes reputation, but character and reputation are not synonymous. 19. Therefore, in the present case, there shall be evidence of any other person on record except the complainant in support of the allegations made by the complainant against the accused persons to the effect that because of the alleged imputation, the reputation of complainant had been lowered in the estimation of others. 20. No doubt, it is not obligatory on the part of the complainant to examine all the C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 5 / 15 witnesses as mentioned in the list of witness, however, it was the responsibility of the complainant to examine at least one of the witness mentioned in the list of witness. 21. In the present case, sufficient opportunities were given to the complainant for leading his pre­ summoning evidence. However, he opted not to examine any such witness in support of his prosecution story despite giving opportunities for the reasons best known to him. Evidence of the above said person may be the, only, best evidence which might have been given lights on the relevant facts of the case. In the absence, it may reasonably be inferred that if the evidence of these persons be called as witness, it might not support the version of the complainant. 22. Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the present C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 6 / 15 case and to understand the meaning and impact of the alleged imputation as well as its significance, some independent evidence other than the statement of complainant is necessary to decide the effect of the alleged expression used by the accused person and to calculate whether same had made a harm to the reputation of the complainant inconsonance with the Explanation 4 of Section 499 IPC. 23. Hence, I have no hesitation in holding that in these facts and circumstances of the present case, prima facie, the ingredients of the criminal offence are completely missing. From the above discussions, this court is of considered view that in the circumstances appearing from the record of the case, the ingredients of section 499 IPC are not fulfilled in the eyes of law. Complainant may have other civil remedies, however, by stretch C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 7 / 15 of no imagination the present case is devoid of the legal requirements of the essential ingredients of defamation." 4. The perusal of para no. 18 to 23 of the impugned order would indicate that Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate dismissed the complaint primarily on the ground that the complainant did not examine any person other than him to bring on record that because of the alleged imputation, his reputation had been lowered in the estimation of others Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate has specifically mentioned that sufficient opportunities were given to the complainant for leading his pre­summoning evidence. However, complainant opted not to examine any such witness in support of his prosecution story. Further, an adverse inference was drawn that had the evidence of these persons were recorded as witness, it might not have supported the case or the complainant. 5. The petitioner has challenged the impugned order primarily on the ground that there were sufficient ground to proceed against the accused persons and Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate has not correctly appreciated material on record and dismissed the complaint despite being a prima facie case against the accused persons. The petitioner submitted that Ld. C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 8 / 15 Metropolitan Magistrate has wrongly drawn an adverse inference against the petitioner for not examining the complainant's witness. 6. Sh. H. S. Phoolka, Ld. Senior Counsel for the respondents except respondent no. 6, defended the order of Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate and submitted that impugned order suffers from no irregularity or illegality and there are no grounds to interfere on the same. Sh. H.S. Phoolka, Ld. Senior Counsel submitted that even the basic ingredients of Section 499 / 500 IPC are missing and relied upon the judgment of V.K. Bagga Vs. O. P. Arora 2007 CrLJ 1101 wherein it was inter alia held as under :­ "8. Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code defines the offence of defamation and Section 500 provides the punishment for such offence. As to what constitutes defamation under Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code has come up for discussion in various cases, over a period of time, before the Apex Court, this Court and various other High Courts. 9. This Court in the case of C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 9 / 15 R. Sharma v. P.S. Popli [2001 (94) DLT 913] observed that the offence of defamation consists of three essential ingredients, namely, (i) making or publishing any imputation concerning any person; (ii) such imputation must have been made by words either written or spoken or by visible representation; and (iii) such imputation must be made with the intention, to cause harm or with the knowledge or having reasons to believe that it will harm reputation of the person concerned. Therefore, the intention or knowledge to cause harm are the essential ingredients to constitute the offence under Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code. 10. It is, thus, clear that due to constitute defamation under Section 499 , the first essential thing is an imputation. However, in Amrit Lal Batra v. Divakar 2005, it was observed that the imputation by itself is not enough. There C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 10 / 15 has to be an intention to harm the reputation of such person against whom the imputation is made. In Paras Dass v. Paras Dass 1969 (5) DLT 241, it was observed that essence of offence consists in its tendency to cause that description of pain which is felt by a person who knows himself to be the object of unfavourable sentiments of his fellow creatures." 7. Sh. H.S. Phoolka, Ld. Senior Counsel further submitted that complainant has relied upon the CD but he has failed to file the certificate under Section 65 B of the Indian Evidence Act and therefore, in view of the full bench judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Anvar P.V. vs. P.K. Basheer and Others (2014) 10 Supreme Court Cases 473, in absence of certificate under Section 65 B of Indian Evidence Act, the electronic evidence on which the complainant has relied is totally inadmissible. Sh. H. S. Phoolka, Ld. Senior Counsel also submitted that now the complainant cannot be given the opportunity to examine the witnesses cited by him. 8. Section 204 Cr.P.C. provides that an accused can be summoned in private complaint case if in the opinion of the C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 11 / 15 Magistrate, there are sufficient grounds for proceedings. It is a settled proposition that at the stage of issuing of summons the Magistrate is obliged to consider only the allegations in the complaint and the evidence produced in support thereof. The Magistrate can certainly take into consideration the inherent improbabilities appearing on the face of the complaint or in the evidence adduced by the complainant in support of the allegations therein. But, beyond this, the Magistrate cannot go into the merits of the complainant's case at this stage. Reliance can be placed upon Nagawwa vs. Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi , AIR 1976 SC 1947. The duty of the court, at this stage, is to ensure that the complaint disclose all the ingredients constituting the offence. It is settled proposition that summoning of an accused is a serious matter and the court must ensure that process issued by the Court does not become an engine of operation and harassment. Therefore, the Magistrate may even put question himself to the complainant to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the allegations. 9. It is also pertinent to mention here that Section 204 (2) Cr.P.C. specifically provides that the process shall be issued by the Court only when the list of prosecution witnesses has been filed. However, the object of this is to provide a safeguard C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 12 / 15 for an accused person to know beforehand what evidence is likely to be produced against him. A private complaint cannot be dismissed merely because the complainant has failed to examine the witnesses cited in the list of prosecution witnesses. The inquiry or trial before the court cannot be held as mere battle of wits. The duty of the court is to reach to the truth and to impart substantial justice. 10. If we go through the impugned order passed by Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate, it would indicate that Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate dismissed the complaint on the ground that complainant failed to examine any other witness except himself. Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate also made an observation that complainant failed to examine the witness despite sufficient opportunities given to him. However, perusal of the record indicates that the complainant examined himself on 19.12.2013 and closed the evidence by a single line statement. Therefore, it is not born out from record that Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate had given opportunities to the complainant to produce the evidence. It may be said that the complainant did not choose to examine any other witness, but it would not be correct to say that he did not avail the opportunities given by the Court. The principle of natural justice would remind that if the court had to draw an adverse inference for non examination of the witness, at least C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 13 / 15 he should be cautioned and given an opportunity to examine the witness mentioned in the list of prosecution witnesses. 11. I consider that by not giving a specific opportunity and then drawing an adverse inference, only for non examination of witnesses, cited as prosecution witnesses, Ld. Trial Court has committed procedural irregularity which has made the impugned order non sustainable in the eyes of law. In such circumstances, the impugned order is liable to be set aside. Hence, the matter is remanded back to the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate with the direction to give a specific opportunity to the complainant to examine witness, if any, out of the list of prosecution witnesses and then consider the case afresh on the point of summoning of the accused persons. It is pertinent to mention here that since this court is exercising supervisory jurisdiction, it is not necessary that petitioner should have made a prayer to exercise the jurisdiction of remanding case back to Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate. It is also been made clear that this Court has neither examined the case on merits i.e. whether the offence under Section 499 and 500 IPC are made out or not nor the question of admissibility of Electronic evidence. This court is remanding the case back only on the ground that an adverse inference against the complainant should not have been drawn without giving him C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 14 / 15 specific opportunity for examining the witness. Thus, Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate would consider the case afresh on merits after complainant chooses to examine any witness. 12. In view of the discussions made above, the impugned order is set aside. Matter be sent back to the Ld. Trial Court for consideration as directed above and for proceeding as per law. The complaint is directed to appear before the Ld. Trial Court on 20.4.2015. 13. Let Trial Court Record be sent back to the concerned court along with copy of this order. 14. File be consigned to Record Room. Announced in the open court on 15th April, 2015. (DINESH KUMAR SHARMA) ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JDUGE NEW DELHI/ 15.4.2015 C.R. No. 63/15 Anuranjan Jha Vs. Aam Admi Party & others Page no. 15 / 15