L.G.F., vs Block, Shakar Pur, on 24 May, 2013 IN THE COURT OF SH. PITAMBER DUTT;AD&SJ(CENTRAL)-11, DELHI Suit No. 229/08 Unique I.D No. 02401C0938392008 Sh. Mahesh Gupta, S/o Sh. Krishna Lal Gupta, R/o FB-4, Tagore Garden, New Delhi-110 027 ......P l a i n t i f f Versus Sh. Sunil Goel, Advocate S/o Sh. Om Praksah Goel, Resident of :- D-7, Delhi Citizen Co-op. Society, Sector -13, Rohini, Delhi-110 085 Also At:- 61, Aggarwal Chamber-1, L.G.F., VS Block, Shakar Pur, Vikas Marg, Delhi-110 092 ......D e f e n d a n t Date of Institution of Suit : 09.07.2008 Date when reserved for orders : 16.05.2013 Date of Decision : 24.05.2013 JUDGMENT 1 Vide this judgment I shall decide a suit for recovery of damages filed by the plaintiff against the defendant. The brief facts necessitated in filing the present suit are given as under:- 2 That plaintiff is a citizen of India. Defendant is an Advocate by Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 1/13 profession. He got married with the daughter of the plaintiff in April, 2002. Plaintiff took legal services of the defendant after paying his fee. But due to inefficiency of the defendant, plaintiff had to suffer serious mental tension, harassment and physical hardships. It is further averred that plaintiff handed over to the defendant original papers of his properties along with case files, the defendant manipulated and fabricated a Will dated 15.06.1999. He also allured the plaintiff to execute Relinquishment Deed, on his allurement, plaintiff signed three Relinquishment Deeds in good faith, these Relinquishment Deeds were drafted by the defendant according to his own wishes and choices. 3 That Ms. Neha Garg, unmarried daughter of the plaintiff had filed a false and frivolous application under Section 125 Cr. P.C. against plaintiff under the instructions of the defendant and his wife. In that proceeding plaintiff filed an application for review of an order. The defendant filed reply of that application as advocate of plaintiff's daughter. In para-8 of the said reply, the defendant used defamatory language to the effect that the police had registered an FIR No. 656/05 against the plaintiff herein under Section 3 , 4 , 5 , 8 of I.T.P. Act for running business of prostitution. The plaintiff had sent a legal notice dated 27.02.2008 upon the defendant demanding the amount paid to him as fees. The said legal notice was served upon the defendant who sent his reply dated 17.03.2008. In the said reply as well defendant used defamatory language and leveled wrongful allegations knowing fully well the consequences of Section 499 / 500 I.P.C. The defendant has made imputations to malign the reputation of the plaintiff with a view to demolish the moral character of plaintiff and as such the defendant has defamed and caused hurt, pain and mental agony to the plaintiff. On the basis of the aforesaid averment, Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 2/13 plaintiff has filed the suit for recovery of damages of Rs. 5,00,000/- along with interest against the defendant. 4 The defendant has filed written statement taking objection that the suit has been filed without any cause of action; that suit is bad for mis-joinder of parties as plaintiff has deliberately not made those persons party against whom he has made adverse allegations. 5 On merit it is averred that defendant got married to plaintiff's daughter. It is denied that plaintiff ever took legal services of defendant and paid any amount as fee. It is averred that plaintiff has filed more than 20 cases against the defendant and his daughter and he is a habitual litigant. It is denied that original documents of properties were handed over to the defendant. It is further averred that plaintiff had sent a notice dated 05.02.2008 and in para-1 of the said notice, he admitted the execution of Will and he should be stopped to make false and frivolous allegations. It is denied that defendant ever allured the plaintiff to execute the relinquishment deeds or played a fraud or defame the plaintiff in any manner. It is further averred that Ms. Neha Garg who was living with the plaintiff has been pressurized to leave the house and take shelter in the house of her married sister due to the atrocities of the plaintiff and unexplained agony. She left with no other option to save herself from illicit and dubious activities of his father. She filed a petition under Section 125 Cr.P.C. seeking maintenance for her livelihood which is pending in the court. It is denied that defendant ever used any defamatory language against plaintiff. It is averred that the reply of the review application has filed by the defendant on the basis of the bail orders/ police report. It is denied that defendant ever played fraud upon the plaintiff or used / publish any defamatory language Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 3/13 against the plaintiff. It is averred that plaintiff received notice dated 27.02.2008 and sent a reply through his Advocate. It is denied that defendant has made imputations to malign the reputation of the plaintiff or to demoralize the moral character of the plaintiff. All other averments have been denied. It is prayed that suit be dismissed with cost. 6 The plaintiff filed replication to the written statement thereby reiterated the averment made in the plaint and denied that averment made in the written statement. 7 On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the Ld. Predecessor of this court vide order dated 02.05.2009 framed the following issue for adjudication:- 1. Whether the suit is without any cause of action?OPD 2. Whether the suit is barred by provision of Section 10 & 11 CPC? OPD 3. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties? OPD 4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for suit amount as prayed for? OPP 5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any interest on the suit amount, if so, at what rate and for what period? OPP 6. Relief. 8 In order to prove his case, plaintiff has examined himself as PW-1 and reiterated the averment made in the plaint in his examination in chief. PW-1 exhibited the public notice as Ex.PW1/1 & Ex.PW1/2. Certified copy of reply Ex.PW1/3. Reply dated 17.03.2008 as Ex.PW1/5. Legal notice dated 25.05.2008 as Ex.PW1/6. Postal Receipt as Ex.PW1/7. UPC as Ex.PW1/8. AD Card as Ex.PW1/8. Certified copy of the written statement filed in the court of Sidharth Mathur as Ex.PW1/9. An application under Section 24 as Ex.PW1/10. Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 4/13 9 During the cross examination, PW-1 deposed that he is a chartered accountant by profession. He has no relation with Renu. She was his employee only. He does not remember the period when she was his employee. He denied that he has provided an accommodation to Renu in his factory. Further deposed that it came to his knowledge that a raid was conducted in the factory by the police and at that time Renu along with 2-3 persons were arrested on the charge of prostitution. He denied that he was also an accused in the said FIR. He admitted that he had obtained an anticipatory bail in the said matter. He admitted that he has received the reply dated 17.03.2008 send by the defendant through UPC. The reply dated 17.03.2008 sent by the defendant was not published in media or in any other mode. He denied that he admitted the execution of will in his written statement filed in the court of Sh. A. K. Pathak the then ADJ in case titled 'Mahesh Gupta vs. Neha'. He admitted that he had given a notice Ex.PW1/D1. He contacted second marriage after one year of the death of his first wife. He admitted that suit No. 58/08 filed against his daughters was dismissed. He denied that he has filed a false and frivolous case against the defendant only to harass him. 10 The defendant has examined himself as DW-1 and reiterated the averment made in the written statement in his examination in chief. DW-1 exhibited the certified copy of the judgment passed in suit No. 58/08 as Ex.DW1/1 and order in appeal No. 2/09 as Ex.DW1/2. Certified copy of FIR No. 656/05 and proceedings as Ex.DW1/3 to Ex.DW1/14. Certified copy of suit No. 745/05 and 1834/08 as Ex.RW1/15 and Ex.RW1/16 (Colly). Certified copy of the orders dated 19.05.2012 as Ex.RW1/17 and certified copy of the order dated 21.05.2012 as Ex.RW1/18. Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 5/13 11 During cross examination, DW-1 briefly deposed that plaintiff is his father in law. The date of his marriage was 16.04.2002. He admitted that at the time of his marriage the daughter Neha Garg was living with him. His dispute with plaintiff started in July, 2005. The said dispute has occurred because a raid was conducted by the police in the premises controlled by the plaintiff in which few women were arrested involving in sex racket. As per his knowledge, plaintiff was one of the accused in the said case that is why he filed anticipatory bail in that case. He admitted that plaintiff had filed a complaint against him before Bar Council of Delhi. He filed his reply dated 27.08.2010 before the Bar Council Ex. DW1/D1. He denied that he was aware that plaintiff was a witness in the said criminal case and not an accused. He admitted that plaintiff has filed various cases against him. He volunteered that many of those cases have already been dismissed. He admitted that plaintiff has has filed a criminal complaint of defamation against him. He denied that his dispute with the plaintiff started when he sold the property of plaintiff situated at Sainik Farm. He denied that he has levied defamatory allegation against the plaintiff. 12 I have heard both the ld. counsels for the parties and perused the pleadings, evidence and other material placed on record. My issue wise findings is as under :- 13 ISSUE NO. 1 Whether the suit is without any cause of action? OPP ISSUE NO. 4 Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for suit amount as prayed for? OPP ISSUE NO. 5 Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any interest on the suit amount, if so, at what rate and for what period? OPP Issue No. 1, 4 & 5 are taken together as they are interconnected. The Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 6/13 plaintiff has filed a suit for damages against the defendant on the ground that defendant being the advocate of plaintiff's daughter filed reply to a review application in a complaint case under Section 125 Cr.P.C. in which defendant had used defamatory language against the plaintiff. The defendant also sent reply dated 17.03.2008 of legal notice dated 27.02.2008 through his advocate making defamatory statement against the plaintiff. As per the plaintiff, defendant has defamed the plaintiff for which he has liable to pay damages. 14 The defendant has taken a plea that he filed the reply in the complaint case under Section 125 Cr. P.C. as per the instruction given by his clients and said reply was based upon the information received from bail orders and police report and the reply of the notice was addressed to plaintiff only and the there was no publication. As per the defendant, plaintiff has filed false suit against him. 15 Both the parties have led their evidence in support of their respective plea. 16 A perusal of pleading and evidence led on record shows that plaintiff has filed the present suit for damages against the defendant on the ground that defendant has defamed him by making defamatory statement in the reply filed by the defendant as advocate on behalf of plaintiff's daughter in a complaint case under Section 125 Cr. P.C. as well as by way of reply of legal notice dated 27.02.2008 sent by the defendant. 17 The defamation is injury to the reputation of a person. If a person injures the reputation of another he does at his own risk. In order to invoke an Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 7/13 action for defamation three essential conditions are required to be complied with:- (1) The statement must be defamatory, (2) That said statement must be refer to the plaintiff and (3) The statement must be published. 18 The defamatory statement is one which tends to injure the reputation of the plaintiff. The defamation is of two kinds namely Libel and Slander. In 'Libel', the defamatory statement made in some permanent and physical form in writing or otherwise recorded such as printing, typing pictures, photographs, caricatures etc. and in 'Slander', the defamatory statement of reputation is expressed by speech or its equivalent. 19 The plaintiff has claimed that defendant has defamed him on the ground that he being the advocate of his daughter filed a reply before the Ld. MM in complaint case filed under Section 125 Cr.P.C. The said reply has been placed on record by the plaintiff as Ex.PW1/3. A perusal of the reply shows that same was filed in a case 'Neha Garg vs. Mahesh Gupta' in which defendant was admittedly not a party. He presented the said reply in the court being the counsel for the petitioner in that case. In para-8 of the said reply, it is averred by that petitioner that "it is pertinent to mention here that police had registered an FIR No. 656/05 against the defendant under Section 3 , 4 , 5 , 8 of I.T.P. Act for running business of prostitution from the WZ181, Shakarpur Village, Rani Bagh, Delhi-110034." As per the defendant, the said fact was based on information received by him from the bail order as well as from the police record. 20 The plaintiff, during cross examination deposed that it had come to his knowledge that a raid was conducted in a factory by the police and at that Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 8/13 time Renu along with two-three persons were arrested on the charge of prostitution. He admitted that he had obtained an anticipatory bail in the said matter. The defendant has also placed on record the certified copy of the bail application filed by the plaintiff in FIR No. 656/05 against the defendant under Section 3 , 4 , 5 , 8 of I.T.P. Act as Ex.DW1/4. In para-5 of that application, plaintiff himself has mentioned that he has genuine apprehensions of the arrest from the hands of the concerned police, on that ground the said application for anticipatory bail was filed. The said application was heard by the court of Sh. N. K. Gupta, the then ASJ who granted anticipatory bail to the plaintiff for 14.07.2005. 21 The aforesaid fact thus clearly suggests that the plaintiff himself was under impression that he could be arrested in the said FIR as a raid was conducted in his premises. Thus the averment mentioned in reply Ex.PW1/4 relates to the fact recorded in bail application and the order Ex.DW1/4 and that cannot be said defamatory in itself. Moreover, said reply was filed by the defendant being the counsel of plaintiff's daughter and not on his own behalf. 22 The Hon'ble Kerala High Court in 'M. K. Parameswara Kurup Vs. N. Krishna Pillai ' reported as AIR 1966 Kerala 264 has held that " A counsel owes a duty to his client and he must carry out faithfully his client's instructions. If the client makes serious allegations against the party in a suit, it is counsel's duty to plead those allegations in the plaint or written statement or other pleadings. No doubt the counsel must perform his duty with discretion, and he should not plead what are obviously irrelevant, wild or reckless allegations. But a counsel is not a Judge in the case and it is not for him to decided whether the allegations made by his client are true or false. He Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 9/13 is bound except in very exceptional circumstances to accept his client's words. If serious and untrue allegations are made, he brings himself open to a prosecution for defamation, but he cannot be successfully prosecuted unless it is clearly shown that he had acted in bad faith maliciously." 23 The above judgment clearly shows that a counsel has to act as per the advise of his or her client and he cannot be prosecuted for defamation if any pleading are filed in the court except on the ground that he made allegations maliciously. The plaintiff has neither averred nor proved that defendant had leveled those allegations in bad faith or maliciously. Moreover, plaintiff himself filed bail application for seeking anticipatory bail in the said FIR which was granted to him vide order dated 14.07.2005. 24 The plaintiff has further taken a plea that the defendant sent reply dated 17.03.2008 Ex.PW1/15 through his counsel making defamatory averment in that record. The PW-1, during cross examination admitted that he has received reply dated 17.03.2008 sent by the defendant through UPC. He further stated that reply dated 17.03.2008 sent by the defendant was not published in media or in any other mode. The reply Ex.PW1/15 was sent by the defendant to the plaintiff through UPC which was received by the plaintiff only and not by any third person as admitted by PW-1 himself that said reply was not published. The reply sent by the defendant was thus communicated to the plaintiff himself and not to any third person. Publication of defamatory statement is the essential pre-condition for defamation. Publication means making the defamatory matter known to some person other than the person defamed and unless that is done, no civil action for defamation lies. Communication to the plaintiff himself is not enough because defamation is Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 10/13 the injury to the reputation and reputation consists in the estimation in which other hold him and not a man's own opinion of himself. 25 The Hon'ble Madras High Court in 'B. P. Bhaskar vs. B. P. Shiva' reported as 1993 Criminal Law J. 2685 has held that "No doubt the notice containing the alleged Scurrilous imputations had been received by the complaint at Madras. The receipt on such a notice by the complainant by itself, as already stated, will not at all amount to publication in the eyes of law." 26 The aforesaid fact clearly shows that if the reply of the notice is received by the plaintiff himself then receipt of the notice would not tantamount to publication which is necessary for initiating action for defamation. The publication means making defamatory matters known to some persons other then the person defamed and unless that is done, no civil action for defamation lies. In the present case, reply Ex.PW1/15 was received by the plaintiff himself and not by third person, therefore, there is no publication as required for initiating civil action for defamation. Moreover, reply Ex.PW1/15 only speaks about statement of fact which is based on bail orders and police report and are not defamatory in itself. In view of my above discussions, my issue wise findings is as under:- 27 ISSUE NO. 1 Whether the suit is without any cause of action? OPD The plaintiff has failed to prove on record that defendant has caused defamation, which gives cause of action to the plaintiff for filing the suit for damages against the defendant. The plaintiff has failed to prove on record that he has any cause of action against the defendant. The defendant has successfully discharged the onus of Issue No. 1, same is accordingly decided Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 11/13 in favour of the defendant. 28 ISSUE NO. 4 Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree for suit amount as prayed for? OPP ISSUE NO. 5 Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any interest on the suit amount, if so, at what rate and for what period? OPP In view of the above discussion, I am of the considered view that, plaintiff has failed to prove on record that defendant used any defamatory statement against him for which plaintiff can file a suit for damages. The plaintiff has failed to prove on record that he is entitled for decree of damages or interest from the defendant. The plaintiff has failed to discharge the onus of Issue No. 4 & 5, same is accordingly decided against the plaintiff. 29 ISSUE NO. 2 Whether the suit is barred by provision of Section 10 & 11 CPC? OPD The onus to prove Issue No. 2 is upon the defendant, but defendant has failed to prove as to how the suit is barred under Section 10 & 11 of the CPC. The defendant during cross examination, himself has admitted that plaintiff has only filed this suit for damages against him. Therefore, present suit is not barred under Section 10 & 11 CPC. 30 In view of the above facts and circumstances, I am of the considered view that defendant has failed to discharge the onus of Issue No. 3, same is accordingly decided against the defendant. 31 ISSUE NO. 3 Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties?OPD The defendant has taken a plea that suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties as plaintiff has not made those persons as party against Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 12/13 whom he has made adverse allegations. The plaintiff has controverted the said plea in the replication. 32 The Plaintiff has filed the present suit for damages against the defendant on the ground that defendant has defamed the plaintiff by making defamatory statement in the reply of review application filed by him on behalf of the plaintiff's daughter as well as in the reply of legal notice. The action of the plaintiff is only against the defendant and not against any other person as sought to be pleaded by the defendant. Therefore, no other person is necessary or proper party for the adjudication of the dispute. 33 In view of the above facts and circumstances, I am of the considered view that present suit is not bad for non-joinder of necessary parties. The defendant is failed to discharge the onus of Issue No. 3, same is accordingly decided against the defendant. 34 RELIEF In view of the above, the suit filed by the plaintiff for recovery of damages against the defendant is dismissed. However, parties shall bear their cost respectively. Decree sheet be accordingly prepared. File be consigned to record room after due compliance. Announced in the open court (PITAMBER DUTT) On the 24.05.2013 Additional District Judge Delhi Suit No. 229/08 Page No. 13/13