Subhash Chandra vs The State Of U.P And Another on 15 October, 2019 Author: Dinesh Kumar Singh Bench: Dinesh Kumar Singh HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH Court No. - 13 Case :- U/S 482/378/407 No. - 1044 of 2011 Applicant :- Subhash Chandra Opposite Party :- The State Of U.P And Another Counsel for Applicant :- Nisar Ahmad,K.K Singh Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate,Aswani Kumar Tripathi connected with Case :- U/S 482/378/407 No. - 4979 of 2010 Applicant :- Nidhi Chandani And Others Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. & Another Counsel for Applicant :- Nisar Ahmad,K.K Singh Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate Hon'ble Dinesh Kumar Singh,J. 1. Both the petitions under Section 482 Cr.P.C. have been filed aggrieved by the summoning order dated 25.8.2010 passed by the Additional Civil Judge (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrate, Court No.21, Pratapgarh in Complaint Case No.89 of 2010 ( Vinod Pandey Vs. Subhash Chandra and others ), under Sections 500 , 504 and 120-B IPC. The petitioners have also prayed for quashing of the criminal proceedings pending against them in the aforesaid complaint case. 2. Petitioner in Criminal Misc. Case No.1044 of 2011 is the Chairman of the Zee News Channel. Petitioner no.1, Nidhi Chandani, in Criminal Misc. Case No.4979 of 2010 was working as Anchor of Zee News, petitioner no.2, Vivek Jain was working as Reporter and petitioner no.3, Vashindra Mishra was Editor of Zee news at the relevant time. 3. The complainant-respondent no.2 filed a complaint in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Pratapgarh alleging that he was an active member of the Samajwadi Party and he had unfailing faith on its leaders S/Shri Mulayam Singh Yadav, Shivpal Singh Yadav and Akhilesh Singh Yadav. 4. On 7.11.2009, the bye-election for the Parliamentary seat of Firozabad was to be held. On 24.10.2009, a news programme (Aaropon Ke Ghera Mein) was broad-casted at 6.30 PM in Zee News TV Channel. One lady was saying that her mother-in-law was having relationship with Samajwadi Party and in her house big and small leaders of Samajwadi Party keep coming. Her mother-in-law would put pressure on her to go with the leaders and she would assault her for the said purpose. That lady told the anchor/correspondent that Shivpal Singh Yadav was not involved. The anchor, Nidhi Chandani said that there were serious allegations of sexual exploitation against the two top leaders of Samajwadi Party and, when Shivpal Singh Yadav was confronted about this allegation, he just avoided the question. It was alleged that since the complainant belonged to the Samajwadi Party and he was Ex-Secretary of the Samajwadi Party Adhivakta Sabha, his esteem and reputation in the general public and the persons known to him got seriously lowered and affected. He also said that since he had close connection with Shivpal Singh Yadav, people known to him had started thinking that he was also of the same character. 5. On the aforesaid complaint, after considering the complaint and the statement of the complainant recorded under Section 200 Cr.P.C. and the statements of two witnesses P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 under Sections 202 Cr.P.C., the learned Magistrate had summoned the petitioners vide order dated 25.8.2010 for offences under Sections 500 , 504 and 120-B IPC. 6. Heard Sri I.B. Singh, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Sajeet Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners and Sri Ashwani Kumar Tripathi, learned counsel for the complainant-respondent no.2. 7. Learned Senior Counsel has submitted that the learned Magistrate without applying his judicial mind, has summoned the petitioners in a mechanical manner without satisfying that whether the complainant can be said to be a "person aggrieved" under Section 199 Cr.P.C. Section 199 Cr.P.C. lays down an exception to the general rule that a criminal complaint can be filed by anyone irrespective of whether he is "aggrieved person" or not. But there is a departure from this norm under Section 199 of the Code in so far as the provision permits only an "aggrieved person" to move the Court in case of defamation. He, therefore, submits that the complainant/respondent no.2 cannot be said to be an aggrieved person and, therefore, the complaint itself was not maintainable. 8. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent no.2 submits that the complainant was the "person aggrieved" inasmuch as he was the member of the Samajwadi Party, and the news item, which was broad-casted, clearly was defamatory against the Samajwadi Party and its leaders Shivpal Singh Yadav. His reputation has suffered because of the aforesaid broadcast and, therefore, he is a "person aggrieved". The learned Magistrate has not committed any error in summoning the petitioners for offences under Sections 500 , 504 and 120-B IPC. 9. It would apposite to extract the provisions of Section 199 Cr.P.C., which read as under :- "199. Prosecution for defamation.-- (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence: Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court make a complaint on his or her behalf. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, when any offence falling under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) is alleged to have been committed against a person who at the time of such commission, is the President of India, the Vice- President of India, the Governor of a State, the Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union territory, or any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his conduct in the discharge of his public functions a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence, without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the Public Prosecutor. (3) Every complaint referred to in sub- section (2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably sufficient to give notice to the caused of the offence alleged to have been committed by him. (4) No complaint Under sub- section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction- (a) of the State Government, in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State or a Minister of that Government; (b) of the State Government, in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the State; (c) of the Central Government, in any other case. (5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under sub- section (2) unless the complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. (6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence upon such complaint." 10. Thus, the Magistrate can take cognizance for an offence of defamation only upon a complaint by person, who is aggrieved. The departure for taking cognizance under Section 199 Cr.P.C. in respect of defamation cases is to discourage filing of the frivolous complaints. 11. To constitute an offence of defamation, there has to be imputation and admission made in the manner as provided under the provision for knowing or causing harm or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the person about whom it is made. Causing harm to the reputation of the person is the basis on which the offence of the defamation is founded. There has to be mens rea of the person making imputation to constitute the said offence. The complainant is required to show that the accused had intended or known or reason to believe that the imputation made by him would harm the reputation of the complainant. In most of the criminal defamation cases, there is heavy burden on the magistracy to scrutinise the complaint in all aspects. The Magistrate must be satisfied by application of mind on the basis of relevant facts and circumstances whether the ingredients of Section 499 IPC are satisfied and whether the accused has committed the offence before issuing process. The Magistrate must be circumspect and judicious in exercising his jurisdiction. The words "some person aggrieved" used in Section 199 Cr.P.C. are not to wide, and refer to definite identity of a person or group of persons, who sustained specific legal injury. "Person aggrieved" is to be determined by the Court in each case and the Court is to be satisfied that the complainant is "person aggrieved". 12. The Supreme Court in the case of S. Khushboo Vs. Kanniammal and another , (2010) 5 SCC 600 has delineated the object of limitation for filing the complaint for defamation of a person, who is aggrieved. Unless specific legal injury is caused to the person, he cannot be said to be a person aggrieved. Paragraphs 37 and 42 of the aforesaid judgement, which are relevant for the purposes of the present case, are extracted herein-below:- "37. It may be reiterated here that in respect of the offence of defamation, Section 199 CrPC mandates that the Magistrate can take cognizance of the offence only upon receiving a complaint by a person who is aggrieved. This limitation on the power to take cognizance of defamation serves the rational purpose of discouraging the filing of frivolous complaints which would otherwise clog the Magistrate's Courts. There is of course some room for complaints to be brought by persons other than those who are aggrieved, for instance when the aggrieved person has passed away or is otherwise unable to initiate legal proceedings. However, in the given facts of the present case, we are unable to see how the complainants can be properly described as "persons aggrieved" within the meaning of Section 199(1) CrPC. As explained earlier, there was no specific legal injury caused to any of the complainants since the appellant's remarks were not directed at any individual or a readily identifiable group of people. 42. While deciding the case, this Court in G. Narasimhan [(1972) 2 SCC 680 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 777 : AIR 1972 SC 2609] placed reliance on the judgment of the House of Lords in Knupffer v. London Express Newspaper Ltd. [1944 AC 116 : (1944) 1 All ER 495 (HL)] , wherein it had been held that it is an essential element of the cause of action for defamation that the words complained of should be published "of the complainant/plaintiff". Where he is not named, the test would be whether the words would reasonably lead people acquainted with him to the conclusion that he was the person referred to. In fact, it is the reputation of an individual person which must be in question and only such a person can claim to have "a legal peg for a justifiable claim to hang on"." 13. The Supreme Court in the case of Subramanian Swamy Vs. Union of India, Ministry of Law and others , (2016) 7 SCC 221, in paragraphs 197 and 198 after taking note of the judgement in the case of S. Khushboo (supra), held as under :- "197. Now, we shall advert to Section 199 CrPC, which provides for prosecution for defamation. Sub-section (1) of the said section stipulates that no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XXI of the Penal Code, 1860 except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence; provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the court, make a complaint on his or her behalf. Sub-section (2) states that when any offence is alleged against a person who is the President of India, the Vice-President of India, the Governor of a State, the Administrator of a Union Territory or a Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union Territory, or any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his conduct in the discharge of his public functions, a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence, without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the Public Prosecutor. Sub-section (3) states that every complaint referred to in sub-section (2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably sufficient to give notice to the accused of the offence alleged to have been committed by him. Sub-section (4) mandates that no complaint under sub-section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction of the State Government, in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State or a Minister of that Government or any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the State and of the Central Government, in any other case. Sub-section (5) bars the Court of Session from taking cognizance of an offence under sub-section (2) unless the complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. Sub-section (6) states that nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence upon such complaint. 198. The said provision is criticised on the ground that "some person aggrieved" is on a broader spectrum and that is why, it allows all kinds of persons to take recourse to defamation. As far as the concept of "some person aggrieved" is concerned, we have referred to a plethora of decisions in course of our deliberations to show how this Court has determined the concept of "some person aggrieved". While dealing with various Explanations, it has been clarified about definite identity of the body of persons or collection of persons. In fact, it can be stated that the "person aggrieved" is to be determined by the courts in each case according to the fact situation. It will require ascertainment on due deliberation of the facts. In John Thomas v. K. Jagadeesan [John Thomas v. K. Jagadeesan, (2001) 6 SCC 30 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 974] while dealing with "person aggrieved", the Court opined that the test is whether the complainant has reason to feel hurt on account of publication is a matter to be determined by the court depending upon the facts of each case. In S. Khushboo [S. Khushboo v. Kanniammal , (2010) 5 SCC 600 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 1299] , while dealing with "person aggrieved", a three-Judge Bench has opined that the respondents therein were not "person aggrieved" within the meaning of Section 199(1) CrPC as there was no specific legal injury caused to any of the complainants since the appellant's remarks were not directed at any individual or readily identifiable group of people. The Court placed reliance on M.S. Jayaraj v. Commr. of Excise [M.S. Jayaraj v. Commr. of Excise, (2000) 7 SCC 552] and G. Narasimhan [G. Narasimhan v. T.V. Chokkappa , (1972) 2 SCC 680 : 1972 SCC (Cri) 777] and observed that if a Magistrate were to take cognizance of the offence of defamation on a complaint filed by one who is not an "aggrieved person", the trial and conviction of an accused in such a case by the Magistrate would be void and illegal. Thus, it is seen that the words "some person aggrieved" are determined by the courts depending upon the facts of the case. Therefore, the submission that it can include any and everyone as a "person aggrieved" is too specious a submission to be accepted." 14. Thus, considering the averments made in the complaint, it has be determined whether the complainant can be said to be a "person aggrieved". The news item has broad-casted, did not make allegations against the Samajwadi Party as such. It was said that there were serious allegations against two top leaders of the Samajwadi Party. The case was related to sexual exploitation. The allegations were not against Samajwadi Party as such. It would be far-fetched to say that since the complainant was a member of the Samajwadi Party, he was a person aggrieved. There was no legal injury caused to him as defined under Section 499 IPC. Learned Magistrate did not apply his judicial mind to scrutinize the complaint whether the complainant was a person aggrieved or not. 15. In view thereof, this Court finds that the learned Magistrate without applying his judicial mind, has issued process against the petitioners and, therefore, the same is liable to be quashed. 16. Thus, both the petitions are allowed and the summoning order dated 25.8.2010 and, the proceedings of Complaint Case No.89 of 2010 ( Vinod Pandey Vs. Subhash Chandra and others ), under Sections 500 , 504 and 120-B IPC, pending before the Additional Civil Judge (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrate, Court No.21, Pratapgarh are hereby quashed. ( Dinesh Kumar Singh, J.) Order Date :- 15.10.2019 Rao/-