S.Gurusamy Reddiar vs R.Purushothama Reddiar on 10 July, 2012 Author: T.Raja Bench: T.Raja IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS Dated:- 10.07.2012 Coram:- The Hon'ble Mr. Justice T.RAJA Second Appeal Nos.142 and 143 of 2007 S.Gurusamy Reddiar ... Appellant in S.A. No.142/07 Dr.Jayachandran ... Appellant in S.A. No.143/07 vs. R.Purushothama Reddiar ... Respondents in both the S.As. Second Appeals filed under Section 100 CPC as against the common judgment and decree, dated 20.09.2005, passed by the Principal District Court, Cuddalore, in A.S. Nos.6 and 7 of 2005, confirming the judgment and decree, dated 29.09.2004, of the Subordinate Judge, Panruti, in O.S. Nos.94 and 132 of 1999. For Appellant in : Mr.V.T.Gopalan, Senior both S.As. Counsel for Mrs.Radha Gopalan For Respondent in : Mrs.Hema Sampath, Senior both S.As. Counsel for Mrs.R.Meenal. - - - - - COMMON JUDGMENT The present Second Appeals have been filed by the appellants/plaintiffs, questioning the correctness of the Judgment and decree, dated 20.09.2005, passed by the Principal District Judge, Cuddalore, in A.S. Nos.6 and 7 of 2005, whereby, the judgment and decree passed by the Subordinate Judge, Panrutti, in O.S. Nos.94 and 132 of 1999 on 29.09.2004, dismissing the individual suits filed by the plaintiffs claiming compensation/damages from the defendant on the ground of defamation, came to be confirmed. 2. For better understanding and appreciation of the case and cause, the factual background in which the lis was initiated by the unsuccessful plaintiffs is necessarily to be re-capitulated particularly in regard to the claim of the respective plaintiffs/appellants that they individually suffered defamation by the act of the defendant/respondent. i) S.Gurusamy Reddiar/appellant in Second Appeal No.142 of 2007 filed O.S. No.94 of 1999 against defendant-Purushothama Reddiar, who is none else than the blood brother of the son-in-law of Gurusamy Reddiar by name Dr.R.Jayachandran viz., the appellant in S.A. No.143 of 2007/plaintiff in O.S. no.132 of 1999, by pleading that he has good name and reputation amongst the public at his native place/Panrutti and he owns properties worth crores of rupees and he is also operating buses; that his son-in-law/Dr.Jayachandran is one of the famous Doctors at Chennai and he runs a Hospital by name Guest Hospital, Chetpet, Chennai; that, after partition in the family of his son-in-law, the properties/land fell to the share of the son-in-law were initially entrusted with his elder brother/defendant for development and for derivation of income there-from, however, as the defendant evaded to account for the income and intended to take the properties, the son-in-law nominated the plaintiff as his Power Agent to administer the properties; that the defendant, aggrieved by such action, with the influence of his eldest Brother by name P.R.Bhaskara Reddiar, who is an Engineer in the TNEB, obtained agricultural service connection in respect of the property of the son-in-law, whereupon, the plaintiff as power agent of his son-in-law addressed the Electricity Board to take action against Bhaskara Reddiar and he further followed up the matter by filing a suit in O.S. No.78/99 on the file of Sub Court, Vrithachalam; that thereafter, on the instructions of the son-in-law, the plaintiff also filed a suit in O.S. No.95/99 before the same Court for declaration of title and permanent injunction in respect of the properties of the son-in-law attempted to be disturbed by the defendant; that the son-in-law also in his personal capacity issued notices dated 12.01.1999 and 20.02.1999 (marked as Exs.A1 and A2 in O.S. No.132 of 1999 filed by the son-in-law); that the reply notice dated 03.03.1999 (marked as Ex.A5), issued by the defendant, gave cause of action to the defamation proceedings as, in the said notice, it is stated that the real mischief-monger is the plaintiff/father-in-law, that so long as the plaintiff did not poke into the family affairs, the relationship between the brothers (Dr.Jayachandran and defendant) was smooth and that the plaintiff was engaging hooligans and had set up politicians to forcibly take the properties from the defendant, thereby, it was the plaintiff who himself is spoiling the reputation of his own son-in-law; that the defamatory wordings contained in the notice are nothing but expression of the defendant's intention to defame the plaintiff and to torture him mentally and also, equally the son-in-law; that when the plaintiff and his son-in-law jointly issued a notice under Ex.A8, dated 27.03.1999, demanding damages @ Rupees two lakhs, instead of showing remorse or expressing apologies, the defendant by notice under Ex.A9, dated 05.04.1999, justified his action by stating that the allegations are true; and that the defamatory notice dated 03.03.1999 having given a clear cause of action to launch the proceedings, the plaintiff filed the suit seeking to pass a decree against the defendant by awarding damages of Rs.2,00,000/- towards defamation and mental torture and agony suffered by the plaintiff due to the act of the defendant and by awarding costs. ii) Dr.R.Jayachandran/appellant in S.A. No.143 of 2007, filed the suit in O.S. No.132 of 1999 against his brother, the defendant, almost with the same set of allegations as made by the father-in-law/plaintiff in O.S. No.94 of 1999. It is pleaded that the plaintiff is a famous Doctor in Chennai City and many VVIPs are his clients/patients and the late Ex.Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu Mr.M.G.Ramachandran was also his patient. In the Hospital run by the plaintiff by name 'Guest Hospital', patients from all over Tamil Nadu take treatment and being a Doctor of high-profile in the Medical Field, he commands good reputation in the society. The plaintiff's family owns lands at Mathur and Pazhayapattinam villages in Vrithachalam Taluk. After the oral partition effected in the family during 1976, finally, the same was reduced to writing and duly registered on 17.07.1985. As the plaintiff was to be at Chennai for medical practice, he requested his elder brother/the defendant to look after the properties and he paid the expenditure incurred for agriculture. As the defendant repeatedly reported loss, the plaintiff himself managed the agricultural operations and due to work pressure, he nominated his father-in-law as Power Agent by a registered General Power Deed dated 20.07.1998 to look after the properties. The father-in-law, after taking over charge of the properties, noticed a service connection in the land and on enquiry, he came to know that the said connection was obtained by the defendant through the eldest brother - Bhaskara Reddiar, who was then working as an Engineer in the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB), Cuddalore. The plaintiff's father-in-law filed the suit in O.S. Nos.78/99 on the file of Sub Court, Vrithachalam, against the TNEB to proceed against Bhaskara Reddiar and O.S. No.95 of 1999 before the same court against the defendant for declaration of title and permanent injunction. While so, for the notices dated 12.01.1999 and 20.02.1999 issued by him to the defendant, by way of reply notice dated 03.03.1999 under Ex.A5, the defendant stated that it was the plaintiff through his father-in-law attempted to take the law in his own hands and take forceful possession of the properties without recourse to court of law and also, he had set up his father-in-law and his children for doing the unlawful activities by setting up hooligans to wrest possession from the plaintiff. According to the plaintiff, the intention of the defendant in making such offending allegations is nothing but to defame the plaintiff and cause mental torture to him. The defendant was never apologetic, for, after issuance of a notice by the plaintiff demanding payment of Rs.2 lakhs towards damages, the defendant instead of answering the same, persisted in his stand. Hence, left with no other remedy, the plaintiff moved the Suit claiming damages of Rs.2 lakhs and for costs. iii) The defendant, by filing separate written statements, stoutly controverted the allegations. In the written statements, while admitting the claims that Gurusamy Reddiar is a bus-operator and an income-tax assessee and that Dr.Jayachandran is a Doctor by profession and an income-tax assesses, other claims that Gurusamy Reddiar is a owner of properties worth crores and that his son-in-law had VVIP patients including Ex C.M. of Tamil Nadu were denied. The registered partition deed dated 17.07.1985 was only sham and nominal transaction executed for the purpose of Land Ceiling and Income Tax Acts and it was never acted upon. While denying the allegation made against the defendant and the eldest brother-Bhaskara Reddiar regarding installation of service connection in the land of Dr.Jayachandran and also the allegation that the defendant was endeavouring to take the property of Dr.Jayachandran, it is stated that the contents in the reply notice dated 03.03.1999 are correct and true. It is highlighted in the written statement that till 1997, there was no misunderstanding amongst the brothers and only after interference of Gurusamy Reddiar in the family affairs, all problems arose. It is specifically added that the contents of the reply notice expressed in defence are, in law, privileged and legally, no cause of action would ever arise there-from. In a correspondence between two counsels writing notices for their respective parties, at no stretch of imagination, the reply notice can be treated as a publication. The complaints of mental torture and defamation are nothing but stories of the plaintiffs with high exaggerations invented for the purpose of defamation case. Though it is pleaded by the plaintiffs that it was the aim of the defendant to take the property of Dr.Jayachandran, the defendant always made it clear that he never denied the share of the plaintiff. It is only the plaintiff/Dr.Jayachandran who defamed the defendant and his brother-Bhaskara Reddiar with false and unwarranted allegations. As the suits have been filed vexatiously with the sole motive to malign and harass the defendant, they are liable to be dismissed with compensatory costs. iv) The trial court conducted separate trial of the suits by framing more than a couple of issues - as to whether the plaintiffs are entitled to the damages they sought for, whether the court has territorial jurisdiction to entertain the case of the parties and whether the plaintiff is entitled to costs and, after recording categoric findings on the issues in the light of the oral and documentary evidence adduced on either side, ultimately rejected the case of the plaintiffs and dismissed the suit. The aggrieved plaintiffs moved appeals before the District Court and the learned Principal District Judge, Cuddalore, by concurring with the findings and conclusion reached by the trial court and pointing out that there has been litigations and land dispute between the parties and that similar words were also used against the defendant by the plaintiffs for which the defendant also cannot file a defamation suit, ultimately dismissed the appeals. As against the concurrent judgments of the Courts below, the present Second Appeals have been preferred. 3. At the time of admission of the Second Appeals, this Court formulated the following substantial questions of law for consideration: a) When the words are per se defamatory, is it still necessary under law to prove prejudice as a consequence of defamatory action? b) When the defendants have not denied the allegations in the plaint regarding defamation and in the face of Order VII Rule 3, is the plaintiff still required to prove prejudice and damage? c) Whether 'intention' of parties can be an alleviating factor when the words used are 'defamatory'? d) Is not the 'necessity or the need' to use such word in a given situation the 'sole criterion' for deciding an action for defamation? 4) When these appeals came up for hearing on 06.06.2012, this Court, sensing the odd and delicate background in which the case has been brought to this Court by Gurusamy Reddiar and his son-in-law Dr.Jayachandran, who is none else than the own brother of the defendant and who ceaselessly pursues the litigation as if he is fighting against an arch foe, expressed its opinion that in the best interests of both sides, the matter could be settled amicably between the parties, and also extended respite for such course. Thereafter, when the matter was taken up on the next date of hearing, Mr.V.T.Gopalan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant insisted before this Court that the defendant/respondent should express his apologies for the trouble and damages caused by him to his clients. Mrs.Hema Sampath, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent added that there is no question of apology or penance involved since at no point of time the respondent did utter or express anything so as to cause defame or lower the esteem or tarnish the image of the plaintiffs. Consequently, both sides were elaborately heard for disposal of the case on its own merits. For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to here as they were called before the trial court. 5) Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants, by referring to the alleged words of defamation mentioned in the reply notice sent by the defendant on 03.03.1999 viz., the real mischief-monger is Gurusamy Reddiar; only after Gurusamy Reddiar started poking his nose in the family of Dr.Jayachandran and the defendant, the trouble started; Gurusamy Reddiar had been engaging hooligans and setting up politicians to take forceful possession of the properties from the defendant; Gurusamy Reddiar is bent upon spoiling the family reputation without understanding that he is spoiling the reputation of his own son-in-law, Dr.Jayachandran through his father-in-law attempted to take the law in his own hands and take forceful possession of the properties without recourse to court of law and Dr.Jayachandran is not entitled to set up his father-in-law and his children for doing the unlawful activities by setting up hooligans to wrest possession from him; strenuously argued that even a bare reading of the remarks made in the reply notice against the plaintiffs would ordinarily give an impression to a person of even average logic and understanding that the plaintiffs, who are people of reputation with high esteem in the eyes of society, are indulging in unlawful activities over a property dispute. When no one would tolerate to hear somebody calling him 'mischief-monger' which term refers to one who deliberately stirs up trouble or instigates quarrels/enmity, Gurusamy Reddiar, a famous person in his locality commanding good reputation, suffered much mental agony and torture as he was portrayed in the reply notice of the defendant as a person causing disruption in the family ties. Apart from imputing him as an individual who is involved with something in a contemptible way, the defendant defamed his own brother by stating that he had set up the father-in-law to indulge in unlawful activities for taking the property. As the projection made by the defendant about the plaintiffs in the reply notice resulted in mental agony since both the plaintiffs are renowned personalities in their respective localities in terms of honour, esteem, position they hold and the profession/business they embraced to, the element of defamation is very much present to proceed against the defendant, however, both the courts below approached the issue totally in a different way, thereby, the plaintiffs suffered great injustice. According to the learned Senior Counsel, the Courts below ought to have put the burden on the defendant to prove and establish that there was no malice on his part to defame and tarnish the reputation of both the plaintiffs, and by wrongly referring to the provisions in the Indian Penal Code , the plaintiffs were unjustly non-suited. The basic concept much highlighted before both the courts below that a word, although is not defamatory, but expressed with a malicious intention to defame, then the person is liable to be proceeded against for defamation, was conveniently omitted from consideration. By referring to a case law reported in 46 Law Weekly 932 ( Balammal v. Palandi Naidu ), learned Senior Counsel submitted that a case laid before a counsel for his opinion is not absolutely privileged; at all events, if no writ be yet issued and that if the plea relied on is one of qualified privilege, the immunity conferred by the law is destroyed by proof of malice. Having regard to the ratio laid down therein (i) that the defendants cannot escape liability for their wrongful act unless it is proved that in so doing they were not actuated by malice and (ii) that the rule which is to be applied for like cases is the rule of justice, equity and good conscience, which has been generally understood to be the principles of common law in England so far as they are applicable to Indian Society having regard to the circumstances of the case, it is added that, in the present case, even a bare reading of the factual background would suggest that the defendant actuated by malice ultimately defamed the plaintiffs and since he persists in that stand, apart from the damages sought for, exemplary costs should be imposed on him by setting aside the judgments of the courts below. By relying on a Division Bench Judgment of the Bombay High Court reported in AIR 1970 Bombay 424 ( Rustom K. Karanjia and Anr. v. Krishnaraj M.D. Thackeresey and Ors ) on the point that, in an action for defamation, the wrongful act is damage to the plaintiffs' reputation, it is submitted that the injury suffered by the plaintiffs out of grief and annoyance caused by the defamatory statement of the defendant has been aggravated by his not denying or apologizing for making such defamatory remarks. In fact, till now, the respondent persists in his stand with reference to the defamatory statement. Inasmuch as the plaintiffs have been injured in their character, credit and reputation and in the way of their business and had been brought into the public hatred, contempt and ridicule, it is absolutely just and proper to reverse the concurrent findings of the courts below, ordering damages as sought for against the defendant with heavy costs so that the malicious act of the defendant would not recur at least in future. 6. In reply to this contention, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent would submit that, in fact, no cause of action had actually ever arisen for filing the suits and further, absolutely no evidence either oral or documentary was adduced on the side of the plaintiffs before the courts below to establish that the defendant had actually made defamatory statement or remarks and that the same had ultimately affected their reputation and lowered their esteem in the society. It is a very unfortunate case where the plaintiffs picked up lines from the reply notice out of the context and blew the same out of proportion somehow to drag the defendant to defamation proceedings and to see that he is silenced forever as other proceedings initiated against him and other members of the family are pending before courts. That is why, both the courts below, after taking much pains and labour to read the entire factual background in which a pointless case was endeavoured to be projected as a serious defamation case as if reviving a dead man to life, ultimately discarded the self-created defamation theory. In fact, in the reply notice, the defendant specifically admitted that himself and the plaintiff/Dr.Jayachandran do not have problems against each other. Added to that, in the cross examination, in clear terms, the defendant stated that he never intended to defame or belittle the plaintiff/Dr.Jayachandran and that the other plaintiff/Gurusamy Reddiar being the father-in-law of his brother/Dr.Jayachandran, he always gives him the due respect and esteem he deserves. It is pointed out that only because Gurusamy Reddiar started attacking the defendant by using strong defamatory remarks that the defendant and his eldest brother are cheating and swindling the money of Dr.Jayachandran, as a responsive measure that would be expected of a normal and responsible person, the defendant replied that Gurusamy Reddiar is causing trouble by hurling untenable allegations against the brothers of his own son-in-law and ultimately he spoiled the relationship among own brothers. In the witness box, the defendant stated that he has great love and affection not only for his younger brother/Jayachandran but also he treats his younger brother's children as if his own children and that he never intended to belittle his own brother. According to her, even otherwise, statements made in discharge of a legal, social or moral obligation or for protection or furtherance of an interest to a person who has corresponding duty or interest to receive it, are protected by qualified privilege, applicable in this case to the reply notice which never stemmed at the instance of the defendant but only as a response to the defamatory allegations made by the plaintiffs portraying the defendant and his brother as cheaters and money-swindlers. Also, it is very unfortunate that the plaintiffs extremely distend a mere reply notice diligently answering the untenable allegations made against the defendant as if it was a publication attracting the view of the commoners. It was not even the case of the plaintiffs that the defendant circulated the notice to the persons in the locality or published it in any news item so as to term it as a 'publication'. More over, barring the evidence of none else than the plaintiffs themselves, the whole factual scenario itself speaks that the reply statement was made in the conduct of defendant's own affairs in matters where his honour, dignity and interests are concerned. According to her, such defence being very much available to the defendant, the same rebuts the inference of malice, thereby, automatically, the burden shifts to the plaintiff to prove the actual malice on the part of the defendant. This main fulcrum of the issue visibly running through the fabric of the claims was correctly borne in mind by both the courts below and that is why they totally discarded the self-projected claim of the plaintiffs. In support of her submission, learned Senior Counsel referred to the following paragraphs from the judgment of the Kerala High Court reported in AIR 1982 Kerala 95 ( Dr.P.H.Daniel and another v. K.N.Krishna Iyer ), " 9. The classic definition of qualified privilege is what is stated by Parke B. in Toogood v. Spyring -- (1834) 1 C. M. & R. 181, 193: "In general an action lies for the malicious publication of statements which are false in fact, and injurious to the character of another (within the well-known limits as to verbal slander), and the law considers such publication as malicious, unless it is fairly made by a person in the discharge of some public or private duty, whether legal or moral, or in the conduct of his own affairs, in matters where his interest is concerned. In such cases, the occasion prevents the inference of malice, which the law draws from unauthorised communications, and affords a qualified defence depending upon the absence of actual malice. If fairly warranted by any reasonable occasion or exigency, and honestly made, such communications are protected for the common convenience and welfare of society; and the law has not restricted the right to make them within any narrow limits." 10. The above dictum highlights the following aspects: publication of statements which are false and injurious to the character of another gives rise to an inference of malice in law and makes the publisher liable in damages to the person affected. But such inference of malice is successfully rebutted if the publisher is able to show that the statement was made in the discharge of a public or private duty. It is immaterial whether that duty is a legal duty which is enforceable by an action or whether it is a moral duty which is not so enforceable. In the alternative, he must prove that the statement was made in the conduct of his own affairs in matters where his interests are concerned. Where the defendant has succeeded in establishing such defence and has thus rebutted the inference of malice, the burden shifts to the plaintiff to prove actual malice on the part of the defendant. 11. An occasion is privileged only if it can be fairly stated that the person who has made the communication has a duty or an interest in making it and the person to whom it has been made has a corresponding duty or interest in receiving it. Only where these two things co-exist does the law regard the occasion as privileged; per Lord Caher, M. R. in Hunt v. Great Northern Railway Company, (1891) 2 QB 189 at 191." Ultimately, it is submitted that even the plaintiffs would not deny that the so-called defamatory contents expressed were not spontaneous or emanated at the first instance from the defendant, but, it was only a reply to the untenable allegations levelled by the plaintiffs/brother and his father-in-law, and taking note of the essence of the issue that such wordings cannot be magnified to be defamatory in the absence of malice, for, it was just a response to the allegations, the courts below were perfectly right in rejecting the claim of defamation, therefore, no interference can be called for by this Court and also, taking note of the fact that it was the plaintiffs, who ceaselessly troubled the defendant by dragging him to pointless litigations, heavy costs may be imposed against them. 7. I have carefully considered the rival submissions made on either side and meticulously perused the materials available on record. The plaintiff-Dr.Jayachandran and the defendant-Purushothama Reddiar are blood brothers. In fact, it is the admitted case of plaintiff/Jayachandran himself that after the registered family partition during 1985, he entrusted the property to his brother, the defendant for maintenance and that, not being satisfied with the level of income derived, he desired to take back the property. It seems, there was no difficulty in getting back the the plaintiff's property looked after by the defendant from 1985 to 1996. Therefore, for about 11 years, the plaintiff left his properties for maintenance with the defendant and till such time, there was no dispute in the family. Thereafter, troubles started in the family, resulting in handful of litigations at the instance of the plaintiffs against the defendant and his mother and the eldest brother. On the complaint that the eldest brother/Bhaskara Reddiar did some acts in getting electricity service connection in the property of Dr.Jayachandran, his father-in-law Gurusamy Reddiar made complaints to the TNEB to take action against Bhaskara Reddiar. As no action was taken, O.S. No.78 of 1999 was filed by the father-in-law of Dr.Jayachandran before the Sub Court, Vrithachalam, asking for a mandatory injunction against the TNEB to take disciplinary action against Bhaskara Reddiar. Another suit in O.S.No.95 of 1999 was filed before the same court by the father-in-law of Dr.Jayachandran against the defendant's family praying for declaration and injunction. In those circumstances, when the plaintiffs sent notices dated 12.01.1999 and 20.02.1999, wherein the defendant was termed as 'misappropriator', cheater', 'trespasser' and 'money-swindler', the defendant gave the reply, expressing his point of view for which the plaintiffs allege that, with malicious intention, defamatory remarks were made in the reply notice to degrade and ridicule them in the eyes of the public. Before proceeding further, it would be proper to deal with the relevant legal provisions. 8. Defamation as outlined in Section 499 IPC is given below along with Exception 9 thereto, " Section 499 . Defamation Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person." Ninth Exception.Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or others interests.It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the inter-ests of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good. Since the law presumes that malice is present in every defamatory imputation, it is worthwhile at the first instance to briefly outline the broad meaning of the word 'malicious', " In P. Ramanatha Aiyars, The Law Lexicon the word malicious is described as Done with malice or an evil design, wilful indulging in malice, harbouring ill-will, or enmity malevolent, malignant in heart; committed wantonly, wilfully, or without cause, or done not only wilfully and intentionally, but out of cruelty, hostility or revenge; done in wilful neglect of a known obligation. Malicious means with a fixed hate, or done with evil intention or motive; not the result of sudden passion the term malicious imports an evil intent or wish or design to vex, annoy, or injure another person. In The Law of Torts by Ratanlal Ranchhoddas and Dhirajlal Keshavlal Thakore, 21st edition 1987, at page 23 it is stated that malice means spite or ill-will. But in law malice has to distinct meanings: (i) intentional doing of a wrongful act and (ii) improper motive  a wrongful act, done intentionally without just cause or excuse." Thus, in its legal sense, malice may be presumed from the doing of a wrongful act intentionally but without just cause or excuse or for want of reasonable or probable cause. 9. Now, in order to find out, whether the accusation made by the defendant against Gurusamy Reddiar stating him as mischief-monger and against his son-in-law as acting unlawfully was a reply to any provocative accusation by the plaintiffs or such accusation was self-expressed by the defendant with malicious intention, let this court first look into the Notices. Of the two notices issued by the plaintiffs marked as Exs.A1 and A2 in O.S. No.132 of 1999, dated 12.01.1999 and 20.02.1999, the former almost deals with Bhaskara Reddiar and the latter being crucial, the relevant contents there-from are worthy to be extracted here-under:- " ... Prior to two years the relationship between you was smooth but after that that turns hostile and you along with the elder brother said Bhaskara Reddiyar colluded together and planned to swindle the properties from the hands of my client. It seems that you are at the command of the said Bhaskara Reddiyar. Having you misappropriated the amounts realised from cultivation and told my client there was continuous loss right from the beginning.....you, with the ill-advice and help of your elder brother Bhaskara Reddiyar got a service connection in S.No.93/4 without the consent of my client by furnishing false information and by exercising fraudulent means. ... after the receipt of the notice you have trespassed into my client's lands in Sr.No.93/4 of Mathur village and cut down and taken away the casuarina trees worth about Rs.5,000/-.... It is enough for you for all these years of cheating and gaining. Therefore necessary instructions are given to me to take appropriate legal action against you. " From the above notice issued by the plaintiffs, it is clearly seen that they termed the defendant as a person indulging in misappropriation, money-swindling, fraud, trespass and cheating. Next, it is necessary to extract below the vital portions from the reply notice, dated 03.03.1999, sent by the defendant, " ... The real mischief-monger is his father-in-law, Mr.Gurusamy Reddiar, who claims to be his power agent, which my client denies. ..... It is true that the relationship among your client, my client and their brother Bhaskara Reddiar was smooth till 1997, till your client's father-in-law Gurusamy Reddiar poked his nose in the family of my client and your client. ... Your client's father-in-law had been engaging hooligans and setting up politicians to take forcible possession of the properties from my client. .... It is only your client though his father-in-law who attempted to take the law in his own hands without recourse to court of law. .... The criminal intention and act are only on the part of your client through his father-in-law who is bent upon spoiling the reputation of his own son-in-law..... My client has been tolerating the unlawful activities committed by your client, his father-in-law and your client's children only for the purpose of not spoiling the family reputation...." 10. After carefully going through the entire contents of the notices in particular the relevant lines as extracted above, this Court finds that the plaintiff/Dr.Jayachandran, who took back his land even in 1996 did not have any complaint against his brother/defendant. Though the father-in-law took charge and administration over the properties in 1997, strangely, the complaint by him was only in 1998. From the extracted portions, it could be seen that the accusations against the defendant are - he 'planned to swindle the money of his brother', 'misappropriated the amounts realised from cultivation', 'exercised fraudulent means' and 'indulged in trespass, cheating and gaining all these years'. When confronted with these allegations, the conduct of an average person would be to highlight all reasonable grounds he believes to establish his defence and to honestly point out at whose instance the issue is blown up. In other words, if the defendant would not reply in a fitting manner to various serious allegations, callous and casual conduct would only amount to acceptance of those allegations and he would be unnecessarily dragged to other proceedings. Therefore, anyone can deduce that what was intended behind using the term mischief-monger was that because of the father-in-law's interference, the cordial relationship amongst the brothers was broken. Only in this way, actually, the father-in-law himself felt, because, in the course of cross-examination, he deposed that till 1995, the brothers were affectionate and that only after his supervision, disputes arose among them. According to him, it was he, who obtained power of attorney from his son-in-law and initiated about 6 to 7 cases against the family of the defendant for his son-in-law and he had also launched a litigation against the mother of his son-in-law. After facing so many serious allegations levelled against him and various legal proceedings against his family including the age-old mother, when the defendant countered the allegations by making suitable reply, the plaintiffs cry that they have been defamed when hardly any trace of malice is seen in the light of the factual background highlighted. Even before the trial court, in his cross examination, as DW1, the defendant stated that he never had any malice or ill-will against his brother and his father-in-law. The relevant portion, translated into English, is given here-under, " ... He (Gurusamy Reddiar) gave paper advertisement for sale of my brother's (Dr.Jayachandran's) land. Thereafter, he said that it would be given to Harijanas. After inspection, the Government Official returned, terming it 'not suitable'. He (Gurusamy Reddiar) desired to gift my brother's property to poor people. He did this to destroy peace in the family. I sent a reply notice for this. I never intended to defame or belittle the plaintiff. Gurusamy Reddiar, being my brother's father-in-law, I always give him the due respect he deserves. I never intended to demean and defame him. I have love and affection for my younger brother/Jayachandran. I have no intention to degrade him. I never talked ill of him. I always considered his children as my own children and I never defamed them. In the capacity of power agent, Gurusamy Reddiar filed a number of suits against myself and my mother, but, we never initiated any litigation. My mother is aged 85 and she has kidney ailments. ...." The above deposition of the defendant in cross, coupled with the circumstances under which he was to reply, when considered together, would only lead to a conclusion that this is not at all a case of defamation, rather, it is like the sequences in any civil case where the parties make usual claims and accusation against each other to win over their cause. If this case is even imagined to be a good example of defamation, then, all the civil suits where exchange of words and allegations as in the present case is almost usual, would have to be brought within the purview of defamation and the resultant position would be havoc and chaos. After examining in various angles viz., what is the nature of the alleged imputation made; under what circumstances it came to be made; what is the status/relationship of the person who made the alleged imputation and was there any malice in his mind when he made the said imputation; this court finds not an iota of justification to accept the claim of the plaintiffs. It is of much relevant here to quote below the observation of the Patna High Court in Beharilal v. Jagarnath (AIR 1959 Patna 490), " The principle which determines whether any particular occasion is privileged was in (1834) 1 Cr. M. and Rule 181 expounded by Parka B. in these words "The statement is protected if it is fairly made by a person in the discharge of some public or private duty, whether legal or moral, or in the conduct of his own affairs, in matters where his interest is concerned. If fairly warranted by any reasonable occasion or exigency, and honestly made, such communications are protected for the common convenience and welfare of society; and the law has not restricted the right to make them within any narrow limits." 11. In the factual scenario involved and having regard to the explanation offered in the course of cross-examination, the doctrine of good faith is also pervading as the reply of the defendant was only to protect his honour sought to be invaded through various accusing remarks in the legal notice emanated from the plaintiffs. Therefore, when none of the elements of malice, as highlighted above, is hardly seen, there is no purpose in further analysing the issue of defamation dealt with under Section 499 IPC. and even otherwise, the reply notice clearly falls under Exception 9, under which, it is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interest of the person making it or of any other person, or for the public good. Having regard to the above, the decision referred to by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellants, in Balammal 's case (cited supra) cannot be applied to the present matters, for, it was a case where, as a result of the husband removing a jewel worn by his wife, misunderstanding arose between them and the wife had to leave her husband's home and go to her father's house, and a month thereafter, the father addressed a letter to the son-in-law complaining about the ill-treatment accorded by him to his daughter in consequence of the misunderstanding, and requesting him to take the wife and live with her. To reply the said letter, the husband instructed his Advocate to write 'on or about 7th January 1927 your daughter ran away with one M from her husband clandestinely and was staying with him for two days', whereupon, the plaintiffs/father and daughter brought an action for defamation against the defendant/husband and claimed damages for the plaintiff/daughter. It was in those peculiar facts and circumstances involving modesty and chastity of a woman, the Court held that the defendant-husband's statement to the Advocate fell under the category of communications to which only the rule of qualified privilege was applicable and that, since it was found that the defendant was actuated by malice in uttering and publishing the matter complained of, he is liable to pay damages. The present case is based on a totally different set of facts where there is no element of malice involved and, in fact, only the plaintiffs gave provocation by making so many remarks against the defendant that he was a 'fraud', 'cheater', 'trespasser' etc. and thereby invited a reply that the person behind the confusion/mischief was the father-in-law. Therefore, Balammal 's case hardly has any semblance for application to the present matters. 12. The other limb of the argument advanced as to whether the reply notice would amount to publication, should also be dealt with. Section 499 IPC brings in its purview the person who publishes as well as the person who makes the defamatory imputation. Inasmuch as the provision emphasises the words 'makes or publishes', there can be no offence of defamation unless the defamatory statement was either made or published by the defendant. In other words, if there is no evidence that the defendant either made or published the defamatory imputation, then the further question of justification or whether there was express malice will never arise. In this regard it is useful to refer to the following observation of the Bombay High Court in Sukhdeo Vithal Pansare vs Prabhakar Sukhdeo Pansare (1974 CriLJ 1435) "What is publication ? Making a defamatory matter known after it has been written to some person other than the person for whom it is written is a publication in its legal sense. A defamatory matter must therefore be communicated to some person other than the person concerning whom it is written. Communicating a defamatory matter to the person concerned only cannot be said to be a publication. The point therefore, is whether the circumstance that the contents of notice which was got type written by the advocate after instructions of the complainant is a publication in its legal sense. Mr. Sane for the petitioner contends here that it is no publication at all because it was a notice in reply to the notice of the complainant, and it was sent through a lawyer and it was therefore a private and privileged communication without any publication. Mr. Kane further says that this is not a case where the notice was published in a newspaper. He therefore says that the petitioner has taken all due care and attention while pending the reply, to notice. According to him therefore such a reply cannot be said to be a publication within the meaning of Section 499, I. P. C. 6. I am inclined to agree with him because the advocate who sent the notice acted on behalf of his client. He got it typewritten in the discharge of his duties from the Typist. If, therefore, the advocate acting on behalf of his client while discharging his duties got it typewritten and sent it can it be said to be a publication to the typist ? After all communication by the petitioner to his lawyer was a privileged communication and the lawyer in the discharge of his duties got it typewritten from the typist. Such a publication to a clerk or typist in my view, cannot be a publication to a person other than the complainant. " 13. It is also well settled position that mere writing of words howsoever defamatory they may be, to a person intended to be read by him and not intended to be read by a third person, neither gives room to an offence of defamation nor makes a man liable to pay damages in a Civil action. It is necessary to show that the writer intended his defamatory writing to be read by person or persons other than the addressee or at least he ought to have known that they were likely to be so read by a third person or persons. In the absence of such a proof it cannot be held that the writer would be liable for defamation simply because the writing got publication. In this context, it would be useful to quote a passage from the case of Komul Chunder Bose v. Nobin Chunder Ghose , 10 Suth WR 184 (D), (Civil Rulings) which runs thus : "It appears to me that the plaintiff's case is deficient in several respects. In the first place it is not proved that there was any publication, for it is admitted that the letter was addressed to the plaintiff himself, and it was not proved that the letter was read by anybody excepting the plaintiff. It is now said that it might have been proved that the letter was in fact received in the first instance and opened by the nephew of the plaintiff. 'Admitting however, that the plaintiff could have proved this, the fact of the letter being opened by the nephew or by any one else would not constitute publication by the defendant unless the Plaintiff could have gone further and also proved that the defendant, when he despatched the letter, knew that in the ordinary course of business in the plaintiff's house the letter would be opened and read by the nephew or by some one else other than the plaintiff himself ". At any rate, even though it has been now affirmed by this Court that the reply notice in no way falls under the purview of defamation arising from malice, it must be pointed out that it was never the case of the plaintiffs that their image was ever tarnished amongst the members of the public by way of circulation of the notice in the locality by the defendant. The plaintiffs never pleaded or deposed to the effect that the notice was ever circulated in the village/locality. Therefore, absolutely there is no legal basis to sustain the argument of the appellants/plaintiffs. The decision relied on by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellants, reported in AIR 1970 Bombay 424 (cited supra) as well as the case law in Maroti Sadashiv and Ors. v. Godubai Narayanarao and others (AIR 1959 Bombay 443) where the plaintiff's case was that the defendants published a notice in the local newspaper mentioning that the plaintiff's character was not good, are clearly distinguishable on the simple ground that the reply notice involved here does not fall under the category of any publication. The alleged defamatory contents in the reply notice not being the origination and reflection of the malicious intention on the part of the defendant as the same were made only in the context of a fitting reply to the provocative allegations levelled at the first instance by the plaintiffs, none of the elements of malice and defamation is present and therefore, in the light of what is discussed above, all the questions of law, which are inter-connected, are answered against the appellants. 14. In all families either conventional or claimed to be glorious/reputed, its members are closely knit by relationship and in each moment, they learn how to limit their wishes, abide by rules and, in every conceivable manner, take care of the rights and needs of others inside the caring circle. That is why, it is often quoted, other things may change us, but, we start and end with the family. But here is a very unfortunate case where one brother/Dr.Jayachandran filed defamation suits against his own brother/defendant by joining hands with his father-in-law alleging defamation, though in fact, the plaintiffs themselves invited the same by way of reply for the set of allegations hurled against the defendant in the notices issued by them. Once again, it would be worthy to repeat that the plaintiffs filed 6 to 7 suits - one against the eldest of the brothers in the defendant's family and one against the age-old mother, and so on and so forth. Subsequently, after issuing two provocative notices, thereby, compelling the defendant to send reply, when the defendant sent a mere reply expressing his stand that according to him it was the father-in-law who causes trouble, the plaintiffs started yelling defamation. The reply made by the defendant can never be construed as defamation. It must also be pointed out that the plaintiff/brother, who is fighting upto this stage of Second Appeal, very strangely, in his cross examination, stated before the trial court that except in respect of the dispute over electricity connection, there is no other dispute amongst the brothers and that in fact, the marriage of the defendant's son was solemnised at his instance and he played the main role in the marriage. The indifferent approach of the plaintiff only shows that he has taken the courts for granted for his personal disputes. That is why, to give a final chance to mend themselves in the last minute, this Court afforded an opportunity to the plaintiffs at the time of taking up the appeal, to go for settlement so that at least by this time, the stains of rancour and umbrage is wiped out. But, the appellants/plaintiffs, without even realising the fact that they in fact wasted the valuable time of the courts at subordinate levels, insisted for deciding the matter to somehow see that the defendant/brother is made to pay damages. Unless this court ensures that undue benefit from the frivolous litigation can never be derived, it would be difficult to control frivolous and uncalled for litigations. In terms of what is observed in Ramrameshwari Devi & Ors. vs Nirmala Devi & Ors (2011) 8 SCC 249) to the effect that it is well settled that frivolous litigation clogs the wheels of justice making it difficult for courts to provide easy and speedy justice to the genuine litigations, this court intends to set an example for like-minded persons to stop such practice by imposing heavy costs so that motivated and pointless litigations, leading to docket-explosion, is curtailed to a considerable extent. As regards imposition of costs, the following observation of the Apex Court from the Judgment rendered in Salem. Advocate Bar Association v. Union of India , ((2005) 6 SCC 344), can be usefully quoted, " Section 35 postulates that the cost shall follow the event and if not, reasons thereof shall be stated. The award of the cost of the suit is in the discretion of the Court. In Sections 35 and 35B, there is no upper limit of amount of cost awardable. Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that many unscrupulous parties take advantage of the fact that either the costs are not awarded or nominal costs are awarded on the unsuccessful party. Unfortunately, it has become a practice to direct parties to bear their own costs. In large number of cases, such an order is passed despite Section 35(2) of the Code. Such a practice also encourages filing of frivolous suits. It also leads to taking up of frivolous defences. Further wherever costs are awarded, ordinarily the same are not realistic and are nominal. When Section 35(2) provides for cost to follow the event, it is implicit that the costs have to be those which are reasonably incurred by a successful party except in those cases where the Court in its discretion may direct otherwise by recording reasons thereof. The costs have to be actual reasonable costs including the cost of the time spent by the successful party, the transportation and lodging, if any, or any other incidental cost besides the payment of the court fee, lawyer's fee, typing and other cost in relation to the litigation. It is for the High Courts to examine these aspects and wherever necessary make requisite rules, regulations or practice direction so as to provide appropriate guidelines for the subordinate courts to follow. " Having regard to the above ratio laid down, in particular the clear categorisation of various factors that should be looked into while reckoning costs viz., the cost of the time spent by the successful party, the transportation and lodging, if any, or any other incidental cost besides the payment of the court fee, lawyer's fee, typing and other cost in relation to the litigation, and also the rule highlighted therein 'cost to follow the event', this Court is constrained to hold that it would be just and proper in this much deserving case, where the concurrent findings of the courts below are based on precise analysis and sound reasonings without any scope for interference, to quantify the costs at Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty five thousand only) against each plaintiff, payable by them to the defendant within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. 15. In fine, the Second Appeals are dismissed with costs as mentioned above. JI. To 1. The Principal District Judge, Cuddalore. 2. The Sub Judge, Panrutti