Renjith B.S vs State Of Kerala on 7 February, 2013 Author: K. Ramakrishnan Bench: K.Ramakrishnan IN THE HIGH COURT OF KERALA AT ERNAKULAM PRESENT: THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE K.RAMAKRISHNAN THURSDAY, THE 7TH DAY OF AUGUST 2014/16TH SRAVANA, 1936 Crl.MC.No. 249 of 2014 () -------------------------- CC 934/2013 of JUDICIAL FIRST CLASS MAGISTRATE COURT - I, PUNALUR ------------------ PETITIONER/ACCUSED : --------------------------------- RENJITH B.S, AGED 33 YEARS,S/O SURENDRAN, SURENDRASADANAM, KAZHUTHURUTY P.O., KOLLAM - 691309 BY ADV. SRI.G.BHAGAVAT SINGH RESPONDENTS/ STATE & DEFACTO COMPLAINANT : -------------------------------------------------------------------------- 1. STATE OF KERALA, REPRESENTED BY THE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT OF KERALA, ERNAKULAM 682031 2. SHAJAHAN, S/O ABDULMAJEED, THANALVEEDU, KALAYAPURAM P.O., KOLLAYIL, CHITHARA VILLAGE, KOLLAM 691560 R1 BY PUBLIC PROSECUTOR SMT. P.MAYA R2 BY ADV. SRI.B.MOHANLAL THIS CRIMINAL MISC. CASE HAVING COME UP FOR ADMISSION ON 07-08-2014, THE COURT ON THE SAME DAY PASSED THE FOLLOWING: BP Crl.MC.No. 249 of 2014 () -------------------------- APPENDIX PETITIONER(S)' EXHIBITS ------------------------------------- ANNEXURE 1: COPY OF THE ORDER OF THE OMBUDSMAN FOR THE LSGIS' INSTITUTIONS DATED 07-02-2013. ANNEXURE 2: COPY OF THE FIR AND FIS OF CRIME NO 296 OF 2013 OF THENMALA POLICE STATION. ANNEXURE 3: COPY OF THE ORDER IN BA NO 2320/2013 OF THIS HONOURABLE COURT DATED 05-04-2013. ANNEXURE 4: COPY OF THE CHARGE SHEET DATED 19-04-2013 FILED BEOFRE THE JFCM-I PUNALOOR. ANNEXURE 5: COPY OF THE REPORT DATED 10-03-2013 FILED BY THE POLICE BEFORE THE JFMC-I PUNALOOR RESPONDENT(S)' EXHIBITS : NIL. //TRUE COPY// P.A. TO JUDGE BP K. Ramakrishnan, J. ============================== Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 ============================== Dated this, the 07th day of August, 2014. O R D E R This is an application filed by the petitioner who is the sole accused in C.C.No.934/13 pending before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, No-I, Punalur to quash the proceedings under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure. 2. It is alleged in the petition that the petitioner is the sole accused in C.C.No.934/13 pending before the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, No-I, Punalur. The case was originated on the basis of a complaint filed by the second respondent which according to the petitioner, is a false and frivolous complaint made with an intention to harass him and prevent him from initiating action against the Panchayat, before the Sub Inspector of Police, Thenmala Police Station on the basis of which, Crime No.296/13 of that Police Station was registered against the petitioner alleging offences under Section 353 and 427 of Indian Penal Code. After investigation, final report was filed and it was taken on file as C.C.No.934/13 on the file of Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, No-I, Punalur. Even going by the allegations in the complaint filed by the second Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 2 : respondent, none of the ingredients to attract the offence under Section 353 of Indian Penal Code has been mentioned. There is nothing to show that the person whose duty has been prevented by the petitioner, was a public servant coming under Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code was also not mentioned. Further, in the bail order, this court has observed that a person deputed by the Secretary to do certain thing which is not part of his official duty will not come under the purview of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code so as to make him a public servant. Further, subsequently, Section 427 of Indian Penal Code has been deleted and the main allegation was that, by removal of that knob, causing damage to the motor has resulted in preventing the public servant from discharging the duty which was found to be false during the investigation itself. Further, there is no case for the complainant or the alleged public servant that any criminal force or assault has been used by the petitioner against him so as to bring within the definition of Section 353 of Indian Penal Code, the act punishable under that provision. So, even if the entire allegation is accepted, the offence has not been made out and allowing the case to proceed against will only amount to abuse Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 3 : of process of court and so, he is of entitled to get relief of quashing the proceedings and he filed the petition seeking the following relief: "To quash Annexures-2 and 4 by allowing this Criminal Miscellaneous Case, in the interest of justice." 3. Heard the Counsel for the petitioner, learned Public Prosecutor and the Counsel for the second respondent - the de facto complainant and perused the case diary file produced by the prosecutor at the time of hearing. 4. The Counsel for the petitioner submitted that admittedly, the person against whom the offence was alleged to have been committed is a part time sweeper appointed in the Panchayat and he was not really appointed by the competent authority and he will not come under the purview of public servant under Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. Further, there is nothing on record to show that he was deputed for doing that work at that particular time when the offence was committed as well. The allegations are also will not reveal that any criminal force or assault has been done to deter him from doing the work in order to bring the offence under the Section. He had relied on the decisions reported in Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 4 : S.V.Subramania Pillai Vs. G.J.Ponniah [CDJ 1939 MHC 114] and Muhammed Kutty Vs. State of Kerala [2004 (1) KLT 331] in support of his case. 5. On the other hand, the Counsel appearing for the second respondent submitted that all these things are matter for evidence and at this stage, while considering the question under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure, this court cannot go into the genuineness of the allegations made and it is for the trial court to evaluate on the basis of the evidence and come to a conclusion as to whether the offence is made out of not. So, according to the learned Counsel, it is not a fit case to invoke Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure to quash the proceedings at this stage. The learned Public Prosecutor also supported the submissions made by the second respondent. 6. It is an admitted fact that there was some dispute going on between the occupants of the shops and the Panchayat regarding the operation of the motor in that premises and there were complaints also filed regarding the same. It is also an admitted fact that Annexure II Crime No.296/13 was registered on the basis of a telephonic Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 5 : information given and thereafter, a written complaint was filed and his statement was also recorded and the allegation was that CW2 one Vijayakumar was deputed by the de facto complainant to operate the motor pump in the disputed premises and while he was doing that duty, the present petitioner had obstructed him from doing that duty and took away the knob of the motor and thereby, he had prevented the said Vijayakumar from doing that duty and thereby, committed the offence under Sections 353 and 427 of Indian Penal Code. It is also an admitted fact that during investigation, it was revealed that no offence under Section 427 of Indian Penal Code was committed and that Section was deleted and final report was filed only for the offence under Section 353 of Indian Penal Code. 7. I have gone through the entire Case Diary file produced by the Public Prosecutor. There is except the statement given by the de facto complainant that the said Vijayakumar has been deputed to do the pump operator work, there is no document produced or seized by the Police to prove this fact. Further, there is nothing on record to show as to what is the time of work that has been allotted to the said Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 6 : Vijayakumar even in the capacity as a pump operator as well. So, under the circumstances, prima facie, the main ingredient to be considered for attracting the offence that at the time when the alleged incident happened, he was in official duty, is missing. Further, a statement of Vijayakumar will go to show that there is no physical assault or criminal force used. His statement reads as follows: x x x ""SoLSYL! Nkv!>]U](qORfPOU Af]R# wmIU WLqeU ApLtORa rLkjU ja>L" Wu]pOP]sfLRpPOU kr4V ApL% IRP vu(O kr4O. ApLtORa NkvQ>]pL$ IR# j]poLjOtqeoOg S^Ls](O fatU D:Lp]. ApL% IRP DkNhv](OWSpL msL$(LqoLp] fa4O j]!>OWRpL R\pE]Y]sf.'' x x x 8. Section 353 of Indian Penal Code reads as follows: Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty:-Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any person being a public servant in the execution of his duty as such public servant, or with intent to prevent or deter that person from discharging his duty as such public servant, or in consequence of anything done or attempted to be done by such person in the lawful discharge of his duty as such public servant, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 9. Section 349 of Indian Penal Code defines Force and Section 350 deals with Criminal force which reads as follows: Force:-A person is said to use force to another if he causes motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion to that Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 7 : other, or if he causes to any substance such motion, or change of motion, or cessation of motion as brings that substance into contact with any part of that other's body, or with anything which that other is wearing or carrying, or with anything so situated that such contact affects that other's sense of feeling: Provided that the person causing the motion, or change of motion, or cessation of motion, causes that motion, change of motion, or cessation of motion in one of the three ways hereinafter described. First:- By his own bodily power. Secondly:- By disposing any substance in such a manner that the motion or change or cessation of motion takes place without any further act on his part, or on the part of any other person. Thirdly:- By inducing any animal to move, to change its motion, or to cease to move. Criminal force:- Whoever intentionally uses force to any person, without that person's consent, in order to the committing of any offence, or intending by the use of such force to cause, or knowing it to be likely that by the use of such force he will cause injury, fear or annoyance to the person to whom the force is used, is said to use criminal force to that other. 10. Section 351 of Indian Penal Code deals with Assault which reads as follows: Assault.- Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault. 11. The explanation to Section 351 of Indian Penal Code says that mere words do not amount to an assault. But, the words which a person uses may give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures or Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 8 : preparation amount to an assault. There is nothing on evidence to show that he had made any gesture while asking the person not to operate the motor at that time. Even going by the statement given by the alleged public servant, there is nothing on record to show that except asking the pump operator that he should not operate the motor as it will cause nuisance to them, there is nothing mentioned to come to a prima facie conclusion that this was done with some gesture which causes some threat in the mind of the person who heard the same so as to bring the same within the meaning of assault as defined under Section 351 of Indian Penal Code. 12. Further, in the decision reported in S.V.Subramania Pillai Vs. G.J.Ponniah [CDJ 1939 MHC 114] the Madras High Court has held that a Sanitary Inspector of a Panchayat Board is not a public servant as defined under Section 21 of Indian Penal Code and in fact, the Sanitary Inspector in this case was authorized by the President of the Panchayat Board to collect fees and sealing animals before slaughter would not make him a public servant. 13. Further, in the decision reported in Muhammed Kutty Vs. State of Kerala [2004 (1) KLT 331] , it has been Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 9 : held that the act alleged must be proved by the prosecution that it was done at the time when he was doing the official duty which has been entrusted on him by virtue of his official position or by a statute. But, in this case, there is nothing on record to show that he has been entrusted with that duty except the statement made by the Secretary that he was authorized him to do that work which will not sufficient to come to the conclusion that the person against whom the alleged offence was said to have been committed is a public servant as defined under Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code so as to attract the offence under Section 353 of Indian Penal Code. 14. So, even going by the allegations and also the materials available on record, it will go to show that ingredients of Section 353 of Code of Criminal Procedure have not been made out and allowing the case to proceed with as against the petitioner will only amount to abuse of process of court and in such circumstances, this court is entitled to invoke the power under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure and quash the proceedings. So, the petition is allowed and further proceedings in Crl.M.C.No.249 of 2014 : 10 : C.C.No.934/13 (Crime No.296/13 of Thenmala Police Station) pending before Judicial First Class Magistrate Court, No-I, Punalur as against the petitioner is quashed. Office is directed to communicate this order to the concerned court immediately. Sd/- K.Ramakrishnan, Judge. Bb [True copy] P.A to Judge