Naveen Jindal vs M/S Zee Media Corporation Ltd & Anr on 5 March, 2015 Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 (NOC) 1281 (DEL.), 2015 (5) ADR 115 (2015) 219 DLT 605, (2015) 219 DLT 605 Author: Jayant Nath Bench: Jayant Nath $~A-19 * IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI Date of Reserve: February 2, 2015 Date of Decision: March 5, 2015 + CS(OS) 143/2015 NAVEEN JINDAL ..... Plaintiff Through Mr. Abhishek M. Manu Singhvi Sr. Advocate and Mr. Parag P. Tripathi, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Atul Shanker Mathur, Mr. Sanjeev Kapur, Mr. Rajat Jariwal, Mr. Aseem Chaturvedi, Ms. Anisha Sonal, Mr. Vivek Mathur, Mr. Saurabh Gupta, Mr. Sagar Suri, Mr. Anish Chawla and Ms. Mahima Gupta, Advocates versus M/S ZEE MEDIA CORPORATION LTD & ANR ..... Defendants Through Ms. Pratibha M. Singh, Sr. Advocate with Tejveer Singh and Mr. Kapil Midha, Advocates for D-1. Mr. Aman Lekhi, Sr. Advocate with with Tejveer Singh and Mr. Kapil Midha, Advocates for D-2. CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE JAYANT NATH JAYANT NATH, J. IA No. 1070/2015 (u/O 39 R 1 & 2 CPC ) 1. This is another unfortunate case where two known corporate personalities are fighting each other tooth and nail oblivious of consuming precious judicial time. The present application is filed seeking an interim injunction to restrain the defendants, etc. from writing, telecasting or airing any material, article, news etc. directly or indirectly pertaining to the CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 1 of 42 purported allegations made against the plaintiff pertaining to an alleged incident of the year 2001 and 2010 by a lady who has been described in the plaint as Mrs.ABC. Other connected reliefs are also sought. 2. As per the averments in the plaint, the plaintiff is said to be a two- time Member of Parliament from the Kurukshetra Lok Sabha Constituency in Haryana. He is also described as the Chairman of M/s.Jindal Steel & Power Limited. His varied interests, including his educational qualifications from the University of Texas, USA, his crusade regarding the National Flag and having participated in international level shooting events including the Asian Games have been described. Defendant No.1 is described as a controller of several news channels on national television. 3. It is averred that there is a past history of certain controversial conduct indulged in by the defendants and their promoters which has resulted in a deluge of litigations being filed between the plaintiff and the defendants and the person who controls the defendants. It is alleged that sometimes in September 2012, an enormous demand by way of extortion was made by the Editors of defendant No. 1 in conspiracy with the chairman of defendant No.1. This extortion call, it is said, was made pursuant to a vilification campaign against the plaintiff and his company in relation to purported coverage of coal-gate scam in which the plaintiff‟s company was sought to be falsely implicated. Money was sought with a promise to „go slow‟ on the vilification campaign. The said act of defendant No. 1 is said to have led to the following legal actions:- a. FIR No. 240/2012 under Section 384 , 511 & 120 B IPC lodged by Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. (JSPL) against defendant No.1 and its office bearers. Some officers of defendant No. 1 were also said to have been arrested. CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 2 of 42 b. On 26.11.2012 Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. filed a suit before the Bombay High Court seeking damages for Rs.200 crores. On 30.11.2012 the Bombay High Court was pleased to pass an interim order directing that anything displayed by the defendants on their channels regarding coal contracts to Navin Jindal Group of Companies shall include the response/explanation given by Navin Jindal Group of Companies. c. The plaintiff and his company filed a suit before this High Court being CS(OS)881/2014 for permanent and mandatory injunction and damages on account of defamation against defendant No.1 and its office bearers. By order dated 01.04.2014 this Court was pleased to direct that the views of the plaintiff and the connected companies JSPL would also be aired so that their side of story is reflected. d. FIR No. 12/2013 was registered by Delhi Police against defendant No.1 in connection with airing of forged documents. The FIR was registered under Sections 466 , 468 , 469 & 471 read with Section 120-B IPC. e. A criminal complaint for the commission of offences punishable under Sections 500 , 501 & 506 IPC read with Section 34 / 120-B was filed by JSPL before the Ld.CMM, Patiala House Court, New Delhi. 4. Similarly the defendants/their officers have also filed various litigations, complaints, criminal prosecutions against the plaintiff and the companies which are under control of the plaintiff and its officers. The details of such cases are as follows:- i. Editor and Business Head of Zee News Channel filed a CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 3 of 42 criminal complaint under Section 499 , 500 , 34 and 109 IPC against the JSPL and its entire Board including the plaintiff. The Metropolitan Magistrate dismissed the same on 18.03.2014. ii. On 02.01.2013, the Editor and Business Head of Zee News filed a criminal complaint for offences under Section 499 , 500 , 501 , 34 & 109 IPC against the JSPL and its entire Board including the plaintiff which is said to be pending. iii. On 09.01.2013 the defendant has filed a complaint against the entire Board of JSPL including the plaintiff for offences under Section 13(1) (d) read with Section 15 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The said complaint was dismissed by the Additional Sessions Judge on 16.01.2013. iv. On 15.01.2013 the Editor and the Business Head of Zee News Channel filed a criminal complaint against JSPL and its entire Board including the plaintiff for offences under Section 66A of the IT Act read with Sections 415, 417, etc. IPC along with an application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. for registration of an FIR. The Metropolitan Magistrate directed registration of an FIR against unknown persons. v. On 07.02.2013 a criminal writ petition being WP (Crl.) No. 25/2013 was filed under Article 32 of the Constitution to quash FIR Nos. 240/2012 and 12/2013 along with another FIR No. 7/2013. The said matter is said to be pending before the Supreme Court. vi. On 16.04.2013, the Cameraman of Zee News Channel filed a criminal complaint against the plaintiff for offences under CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 4 of 42 Section 323 IPC read with Section 427 / 511 of IPC. The said complaint was dismissed by the Metropolitan Magistrate on 28.06.2013. 5. The present controversy has arisen out of filing of writ petition No. 235/2014 before the Chattisgarh High Court by Mrs. ABC in which it is averred that in 2001 one Mr. D.K. Bhargava along with others went to the house of Mrs.ABC and asked her to sell her land. On her refusal, she was threatened. Some days thereafter the same Mr. D.K. Bhargava along with the plaintiff again went to her house, removed her clothes and robbed her chastity. It is further averred that her thumb impression and signatures were forcibly taken on some documents. She went to the police station to record her complaint but nothing happened. Mrs.ABC has further alleged that on 18.08.2010 she was forcibly dragged and brought before Mr.D.K.Bhargava where again criminal acts were done against her. 6. It is averred by the plaintiff that the allegations made by Mrs.ABC are absolutely false. There were disputes between JSPL and Mrs.ABC as regards the compensation of land and various transactions took place between JSPL and Mrs. ABC since 1999. A legal notice was also issued on 10.06.2008 by Mrs.ABC and thereafter she filed a civil suit. The Trial Court passed a decree in favour of Mrs.ABC vide judgment dated 15.03.2013. An appeal is said to have been filed. It is stated that the allegations are belated, totally false and motivated. It is urged that the allegations have been made much after the alleged incident in 2001. Several legal proceedings have taken place between Mrs.ABC, the plaintiff and its associate companies but no such allegation was ever made earlier. 7. On 19.12.2014 when the said writ petition No.235 of 2014 was listed before the Chhatisgarh High Court, the High Court passed an order CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 5 of 42 directing that reporting of the said matter with respect to the proceedings of the court in print and electronic media are stayed till the next date of hearing. 8. On 06.01.2015 the writ petition was disposed off holding that the petitioner may visit the office of Superintendent of Police, Raigarh for submission of her complaint. On such submission, the Superintendent of Police, Raigarh shall forward the same to the concerned police station who shall take steps in accordance with the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Lalita Kumari vs. Government of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. ,(2014) 2 SCC 1. 9. Relevant part of the order dated 06.01.2015 of the Chhatisgarh High Court reads as follows:- "4. Submission made by learned Advocate General appears to be reasonable. Therefore, it is directed that the petitioner may visit the office of Superintendent of Police, Raigarh along with her counsel for submission of complaint. On such submission, the Superintendent of Police, Raigarh shall forward the same to the concerned Police Station for proceeding ahead in the matter in accordance with law laid down by the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari (supra). It is also directed that the petitioner, along with her counsel, shall visit the office of Superintendent of Police, Bilaspur by 6.30 PM today and thereafter she will be provided adequate security for her onwards journey to the office of Superintendent of Police, Raigarh at State expenses. It is expected of the Superintendent of Police to supervise and monitor the issue so that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari (supra) is fully adhered. 5. With the above observations and directions, the writ petition is finally disposed of. However, it is made clear that this court has not passed any order nor has made any observations on the merits of the issue." 10. It is further urged that the matter is pending enquiry to be carried out CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 6 of 42 in accordance with the law as was directed by Chattisgarh High Court in the said order dated 06.01.2015. It is further averred that in a clearly illegal, mischievous, malicious and vindictive manner defendants No. 1 and 2 are widely misusing the said order dated 06.01.2015 to conduct a media trial against the plaintiff to tarnish his image. It is averred that such acts of the defendants are causing irreparable harm and injury to the plaintiff. 11. It is urged that the plaintiff is aggrieved by the publication/televising of the subject matter, pending investigation, for the following reasons:- (a) The said publications/news programs are totally manipulated, misleading, false and have no iota of truth and are aimed at defaming the plaintiff in the eyes of the public at large; (b) It will emerge from the facts that publication of such news articles and airing of such programmes clearly violates the fundamental rights of the plaintiff guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, 1950 such as right to live with dignity and privacy; (c) It is submitted that airing of such programmes/printing of such newspaper articles is an abuse of the Defendants‟ fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression as it oversteps the Plaintiff‟s fundamental rights and gravely contravenes the norms and principles of journalistic conduct laid down for the press and broadcasters; (d) That the publication and televising of such news articles and news programmes raises a real and imminent threat of impeding fair enquiry of the matter. It is stated that there has been no finding as regards the plaintiff. CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 7 of 42 (e) It is urged that the news programmes published and broadcasted by defendants No. 1 and 2 are motivated with the intent of sensationalizing the matter and conducting a media trial. The acts are per se defamatory, false, frivolous and misleading. 12. It is averred that the defendants have aired more than 20 false, defamatory programmes against the plaintiff from 07.01.2015 to 15.01.2015 on the alleged incident of rape. It is pointed out as an illustration that various programmes are being aired asking questions and attempting to terrorize the police to push the police to take criminal action against the plaintiff. Suggestions have been put to the ASP that in a case of rape, an FIR should be registered first and enquiry should be conducted later. It is further urged that an attempt is being made to harp on the fact that the police is working under the pressure of the plaintiff. For example, a question is posed by the Anchor of the Programme as to who is responsible for the said delay i.e. SSP Raigarh, IG Police, DG (Chhatisgarh), Home Secretary, Home Minister and Chief Minister. Similarly, a reference is made to an interview of Additional Superintendent of Police, Mr. Prafful Kumar where the questions posed are accusatory in nature and blaming the police for not lodging an FIR against the plaintiff. It is urged that the defendants are interfering with the administration of justice and are trying to conduct a media trial which is causing deliberate harm and the prejudice to the plaintiff. Suggestions are being made in the course of the programmes to suggest that the entire administrative machinery is acting in collusion with the plaintiff. It is further urged that though the version of the plaintiff is purportedly aired, it is a highly edited version and has been given inconsequential space and has no effect CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 8 of 42 whatsoever on the viewers. 13. The defendants have filed their response to the interim relief application. It is pointed out that the plaintiff is making repeated attempts for a blanket stay and has made one earlier attempt in CS(OS) 881/2014. It is further urged that apart from the defendants there are various other publications and channels which have covered the order dated 06.01.2015 of the Chhatisgarh High Court in a similar manner. It is stated that prior to publication and broadcast the defendants had sought the comments of the plaintiff in terms of an order of this High Court dated 01.04.2014 passed by this court in CS (OS) 881/2014. It is averred that having followed the said order no cause of action arises in favour of the plaintiff. In fact the plaintiff has suppressed the said order dated 01.04.2014. In the response to the allegations in the plaint about the duration of the programmes or the frequency of the programme are not denied. What the defendant have argued is that the telecast time is only roughly around five hours for the 10 days in question and the average time per day is only 8 minutes per channel. The content and extract of interviews conducted by the reporters of the channels has not been denied. 14. Learned senior counsel appearing for the plaintiff has submitted that the present application should be allowed and appropriate injunction order should be passed against the defendant. It is averred that from 7.1.2015 to 15.1.2015 the defendants have aired more than 20 news programmes on various national and regional news channels. The programmes not only defame the plaintiff but also are said to interfere with the administration of justice inasmuch as the reporter of the defendant are trying to pressurise the police into lodging of an FIR against the plaintiff. CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 9 of 42 It is pointed out that there is a long history of litigation which is pending between the said Mrs.ABC and M/s.Jindal Steel & Power Limited of which the plaintiff is a Chairman. The said Mrs.ABC has filed a complaint to the police authorities earlier also on 26.07.2010 pursuant to which her statement was recorded on 28.08.2010. The allegations are highly belated pertaining to an alleged incident of 2001. It is averred that there is not even an iota of truth in the allegation being made by Mrs.ABC. It is further urged that the action of the defendants is motivated by malafides. Their only intent is to sensationalise the matter by making false, frivolous and defamatory allegations against the plaintiff and conducting a media trial. Based on this motive, the defendants are repeatedly publishing and airing false and defamatory programmes/articles against the plaintiff. Further, it is urged that the repeated coverage being done by the defendants are contrary to the guidelines of News Broadcasting Standards Authority (NBSA). Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of Swatanter Kumar vs. The Indian Express Ltd. & Ors., 207(2014) DLT 221. 15. Learned senior counsel appearing for defendant No.1 has made various submissions to claim that the suit per se is not maintainable. She submits that the plaint and the submissions of the plaintiff appear to stress on the fact that version of the said lady Mrs.ABC is not reliable. It is urged that in view of the nature of pleadings and averments of the plaintiff, Mrs.ABC would be a necessary party to the present suit and in the absence of the same the suit is liable to fail. CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 10 of 42 It is secondly submitted that the suit would not lie as earlier also the plaintiffs have filed a similar suit and the reliefs claimed therein and in the present suit are almost identical and the relief covered in that suit covers the relief of the present suit. In that case which is titled Naveen Jindal & Anr. vs. Zee Media Corporation & Ors. , 209(2014) DLT 267 (CS(OS)881/2014) no interim orders were passed in favour of the plaintiff. The only direction was that the defendants were directed to obtain the views of the plaintiff therein in case they intend to televise any programme pertaining to the plaintiffs No.1, 2 or his companies so that the views of the plaintiff therein are reflected at the end of the said programme. It is urged that the defendants have meticulously followed the above directions. Hence, on account of the earlier suit the present suit is barred. It is next urged that the plaintiffs are guilty of suppression of material facts and in any case no relief of injunction would lie. It is averred that the fact that the version of the plaintiff was taken by the defendants and have been placed on the programmes when they were aired is not brought on record. The plaintiffs have not mentioned regarding the complaints made to Press Council, Election Commission. Hence, it is urged that on account of the said suppression the present suit would not lie. On merits, it is pointed out that a perusal of the order of Chhattisgarh High Court would show that the High Court has noted that Superintendent of police will supervise and monitor the issue so that the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari vs. Government of Uttar Pradesh and Others , (supra) is fully adhered to. It is stated that in Lalita Kumari vs. Government of Uttar Pradesh and Others (supra) the Supreme Court had directed that in cases where a preliminary enquiry is to be held, the same should be made in a time bound manner not to exceed CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 11 of 42 seven days. It is urged that the police investigation is not adhering to the directions of the Supreme Court in the said case of Lalita Kumari (supra). It is urged that if the reporter asks the policeman as to why there is a delay, the question would certainly be justified. It is further alleged that there was no direction by Chhattisgarh High Court to hold a preliminary enquiry as is being done by the police. Hence, it is urged that there is nothing wrong in the reporting or the questions posed to the police officials. Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in the case of Naveen Jindal & Anr. vs. Zee Media Corporation & Ors. ,(supra).The learned senior counsel for defendant No.1 has also filed a paperbook containing judgments of various Courts which had declined grant of interim injunction regarding prior publication. 16. Learned senior counsel appearing for the defendant No.2 has submitted that discussion is a part of freedom of speech which may not be absolute but restrictions that are imposed on the same have to be an aid to the rule of law. Any restriction placed by this court would have the effect of curbing the freedom of speech which would be incorrect. It is further urged that at best the reports made by the defendant are a case of fair comment and justification. It is further urged that this is a complete defence to a suit for defamation and no stay can be granted. It is also urged that the plaintiff is a public figure having been a Member of Parliament. Public is interested in the activities of a figure like the plaintiff and there can be no restrictions imposed on a right to comment upon the conduct of the plaintiff. 17. Learned senior counsel appearing for the plaintiff have rebutted the contentions of the defendant in Rejoinder. It is urged that merely because a plea of justification i.e. fair CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 12 of 42 comment and justification are raised that would not be a ground to decline injunction. To prove the case of justification and truth, the matter would have to go to trial. At this stage, in case the plaintiff makes out a prima facie case, this Court would grant injunction and would not refuse injunction merely because a plea of justification has been raised. Further, reliance is placed on Article 21 of the Constitution to claim that the rights of the plaintiff are being trampled upon and it would be the duty of this Court to protect the plaintiff. It is next urged that the reporting being done by the defendant is abnormal reporting. It is motivated on account of the history of the conduct of the defendant whereby defendants have been indulging in extortion. In 7 days it is urged that 20 programmes lasting 22 hours have been telecasted on various channels of defendant showing an abnormal and extra zeal. It is urged that this is not a case of a bona fide channel reporting facts and events or commenting on the same but a clear case of malicious reporting. It is also gross abuse of the process of law as the plaintiffs are hectoring and pressurizing the police to take action against the plaintiff and also harassing the police with a view to take action against the plaintiff. It is denied that the plaintiff is a public figure and inasmuch as he is an ex M.P. and not a public figure. 18. Learned senior counsel for the defendants have sought to respond to the rejoinder arguments of the plaintiff. It is stressed that the programmes aired by the defendants or the articles written do not cause any interference in the course of justice. Merely asking inconvenient or uncomfortable questions to the police or about the plaintiff would not amount to interference in the cause of justice. It is further urged that there is no hectoring going on and the journalists of the defendants are only probing CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 13 of 42 and trying to get to the veracity of the true facts. 19. The first question that arises in this case is whether this Court would have the powers to grant a pre-publication or pre-broadcasting injunction against the defendants. The above issue is no longer res integra. A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Sahara India Real Estate Corporation Ltd. and Ors. vs. Securities and Exchange Board of India and Anr. , (2012) 10 SCC 603 (MANU/SC/0735/2012) concluded that in most jurisdictions there is power in the Court to postpone reporting of judicial proceedings in the interest of administration of justice. That was a case in which Civil Appeals were pending filed by the petitioner challenging the orders passed by the Security Appellate Tribunal. Certain communications were exchanged between the counsel for the parties pursuant to a direction by the Court that the learned counsel should attempt to reach a consensus with respect to acceptable security in the form of an unencumbered asset. The communications exchanged between the counsels appear to have come on one of the TV Channels. In this background, the petitioner has stated that the Court should give appropriate directions with regard to reporting of matters which are sub-judice. The Supreme Court held as follows:- "29. At this stage, we wish to clarify that the reliance on the above judgments is only to show that "prior restraint" per se has not been rejected as constitutionally impermissible. At this stage, we may point out that in the present IAs we are dealing with the concept of "prior restraint" per se and not with cases of misuse of powers of pre- censorship which were corrected by the Courts [see Binod Rao v. Minocher Rustom Masani reported in 78 Bom LR 125 and C. Vaidya v. D'Penha decided by Gujarat High Court in Sp. CA 141 of 1976 on 22.03.1976 (unreported)] CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 14 of 42 30. The question of prior restraint arose before this Court in 1988, in the case of Reliance Petrochemicals Limited v. Proprietors of Indian Express Newspapers Bombay (P) Limited MANU/SC/0412/1988 : AIR 1989 SC 190 in the context of publication in one of the national dailies of certain articles which contained adverse comments on the proposed issue of debentures by a public limited company. The validity of the debenture was sub judice in this Court. Initially, the court granted injunction against the press restraining publication of articles on the legality of the debenture issue. The test formulated was that any preventive injunction against the press must be "based on reasonable grounds for keeping the administration of justice unimpaired" and that, there must be reasonable ground to believe that the danger apprehended is real and imminent. The Court went by the doctrine propounded by Holmes J of "clear and present danger". This Court treated the said doctrine as the basis of balance of convenience test. Later on, the injunction was lifted after subscription to debentures had closed. 31.... 32. Thus, the principle of open justice is not absolute. There can be exceptions in the interest of administration of justice. In Mirajkar, the High Court ordered that the deposition of the defence witness should not be reported in the newspapers. This order of the High Court was challenged in this Court under Article 32. This Court held that apart from Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the High Court had the inherent power to restrain the press from reporting where administration of justice so demanded. This Court held vide para 30 that evidence of the witness need not receive excessive publicity as fear of such publicity may prevent the witness from speaking the truth. That, such orders prohibiting publication for a temporary period during the course of trial are permissible under the inherent powers of the court whenever the court is satisfied that interest of justice so requires. As to whether such a temporary prohibition of publication of court proceedings in the media under the inherent powers of the court can be said to offend Article 19(1)(a) rights [which includes freedom of the CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 15 of 42 press to make such publication], this Court held that an order of a court passed to protect the interest of justice and the administration of justice could not be treated as violative of Article 19(1)(a) [ see para 12]. The judgment of this Court in Mirajkar is delivered by a Bench of 9- Judges and is binding on this Court." 20. In Naresh Shridhar Mirajkar and Ors. vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr.AIR 1967 SC 1 the Supreme Court was dealing with a issue where an order was passed by the High Court not to publish reports regarding the evidence of one of the witnesses. This was a curb on the principle of public trial in open Court. A nine Judge Bench of the Supreme Court held that the High Court has inherent jurisdiction to hold a trial in camera. The Supreme Court held as follows:- "21. Having thus enunciated the universally accepted proposition in favour of open trials, it is necessary to consider whether this rule admits of any exceptions or not. ........That is why we feel no hesitation in holding that the High Court has inherent jurisdiction to hold a trial in camera if the ends of justice clearly and necessarily require the adoption of such a course. It is hardly necessary to emphasise that this inherent power must be exercised with great caution and it is only if the court is satisfied beyond the doubt that the ends of justice themselves would be defeated if a case is tried in open court that it can pass an order to hold the trial in camera; but to deny the existence of such inherent power to the court would be to ignore the primary object of adjudication itself. The principle underlying the insistence on hearing causes in open court is to protect and assist fair, impartial and objective administration of justice; but if the requirement of justice itself sometimes dictates the necessity of trying the case in camera, it cannot be said that the said requirement should be sacrificed because of the principle that every trial must be held in open court...." CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 16 of 42 21. Similarly, reference may also be had to the judgment of Supreme Court in Reliance Petrochemicals Ltd.vs. Proprietors of Indian Express Newspapers, Bombay Pvt. Ltd. and Ors., AIR 1989 SC 190. In that case the petitioner had made a public issue of Secured Convertible Debentures. A petition was filed in the Karnataka High Court and in the Delhi High Court challenging the consent of the Controller of Capital Issues. In the Transfer Petition, the Supreme Court granted an injunction order directing that the issue would be proceeded with „without let or hindrance'. Certain adverse reports were published commenting adversely on the debentures. The petitioners had objected to the reports claiming that the effect was to comment on a matter which was subjudice and to undermine the effect of interim order passed by this Court. Trial by newspaper on an issue which is sub-judice was argued to be grossest mode of interference with the due administration of justice. The Supreme Court issued an order of injunction restraining the respondents from publishing any article, comment, report or any editorial questioning the legality or validity of any of the consents, approvals or permissions for issue of the Secured Full Convertible Debentures. Hence, the Supreme Court ordered restraint on publication. Needless to add that after the time for subscription to the debentures had closed and the imminent danger to the subscription subsided, the Supreme Court held that continuance of the injunction is no longer necessary. The Supreme Court applied the test of real and imminent danger in order to infer as to whether the proposed publication would lead to an interference in the course of justice for the purpose of grant or non-grant of interim injunction of prior restraint against publication. CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 17 of 42 22. Hence, courts have power to pass pre publication or pre- broadcasting injunction where the court is satisfied that interest of justice so require. 23. The next issue would be as to under what facts and circumstances, the Court should exercise its jurisdiction to grant an injunction regarding publication of news items or broadcasting of programmes. The Constitution Bench in Sahara India Real Estate Corporation Ltd. and Ors. vs. Securities and Exchange Board of India and Anr. (supra) held as follows:- 42. .... But, what happens when courts are required to balance important public interests placed side by side. For example, in cases where presumption of open justice has to be balanced with presumption of innocence, which as stated above, is now recognized as a human right. These presumptions existed at the time when the Constitution was framed [existing law under Article 19(2)] and they continue till date not only as part of rule of law under Article 14 but also as an Article 21 right. The constitutional protection in Article 21 which protects the rights of the person for a fair trial is, in law, a valid restriction operating on the right to free speech under Article 19(1)(a) , by virtue of force of it being a constitutional provision. Given that the postponement orders curtail the freedom of expression of third parties, such orders have to be passed only in cases in which there is real and substantial risk of prejudice to fairness of the trial or to the proper administration of justice which in the words of Justice Cardozo is "the end and purpose of all laws". However, such orders of postponement should be ordered for a limited duration and without disturbing the content of the publication. They should be passed only when necessary to prevent real and substantial risk to the fairness of the trial (court proceedings), if reasonable alternative methods or measures such as change of venue or postponement of trial will not prevent the said risk and when the salutary effects of such orders outweigh the deleterious effects to the free expression of those affected by the prior restraint. The order of postponement CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 18 of 42 will only be appropriate in cases where the balancing test otherwise favours non-publication for a limited period. It is not possible for this Court to enumerate categories of publications amounting to contempt. It would require the courts in each case to see the content and the context of the offending publication. There cannot be any straightjacket formula enumerating such categories. In our view, keeping the above parameters, if the High Court/ Supreme Court (being Courts of Record) pass postponement orders under their inherent jurisdictions, such orders would fall within "reasonable restrictions" under Article 19(2) and which would be in conformity with societal interests, as held in the case of Cricket Association of Bengal (supra)... 43. In the light of the law enunciated hereinabove, anyone, be he an accused or an aggrieved person, who genuinely apprehends on the basis of the content of the publication and its effect, an infringement of his/ her rights under Article 21 to a fair trial and all that it comprehends, would be entitled to approach an appropriate writ court and seek an order of postponement of the offending publication/ broadcast or postponement of reporting of certain phases of the trial (including identity of the victim or the witness or the complainant), and that the court may grant such preventive relief, on a balancing of the right to a fair trial and Article 19(1)(a) rights, bearing in mind the abovementioned principles of necessity and proportionality and keeping in mind that such orders of postponement should be for short duration and should be applied only in cases of real and substantial risk of prejudice to the proper administration of justice or to the fairness of trial. Such neutralizing device (balancing test) would not be an unreasonable restriction and on the contrary would fall within the proper constitutional framework." 24. This High Court had also the occasion to deal with the entire gamut of judgments on this issue in the case of Swatanter Kumar vs. The Indian Express Ltd. & Ors. (supra) in CS(OS) 102/2014 passed on 16.01.2014. This Court held that it had power to restrain publication in media if it CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 19 of 42 arrives at a finding that the publication may result in interference with the administration of justice or against the principle of fair trial or open justice. The relevant portion of the order reads as follows:- "46. From the mere reading of the excerpts from the judgment of Sahara India (supra), it can be said that the High Court has ample powers under its inherent powers to restraint the publication in media in the event it arrives at the finding that the said publication may result in interference with the administration of justice or would be against the principle of fair trial or open justice. Although the aforenoted observations seem to suggest that the Court can restrain the publication of the news relating to Court proceedings or postpone the same in order obtain the fair trial. The later part of the judgement in Sahara India (supra) suggest that the order of the prior restraint is a preventive order and the said order may proceed to restrain any publication which may cause obstruction of the justice which include intrusion in right to have open justice unbiased by any public opinion expressed in publication. Thus, the interference with the course of justice as a term is not merely confined to the restraint order only on the publications relating to pending Court proceedings. But also, any publication which would give excessive adverse publicity to the accused or alleged victim which may likely to hamper the fair trial in future is also covered within the ambit and sweep of the enquiry of the Court as to what may constitute the interference with the course of the justice.... ................ 49. Upon fair reading of the aforenoted paragraph of the Sahara India (supra), it is clear that it is the question of degree of prejudice and its nexus with fetching the fair justice or open justice which is a potent factor which is required to be examined and tested by the Courts at the time of passing of the injunction restraining or postponing the publication. The line between fairness and unfairness is sometimes blurred but if the same is likely to prejudice the accused and project him as culprit which may cause irreversible damage to a person, the Court can step in and assume jurisdiction for future prevention CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 20 of 42 of such damage so that the administration of the justice is not impaired." 25. The present matter is at the stage of preliminary enquiry by the police. The question is whether it will be appropriate for the Court to grant stay on publication at this preliminary stage. Do the powers of the court encompass within its sweep, the power to pass an injunction or prior restraint before or after an FIR is registered and before the court commences trial. 26. For the legal position in this regard, reference may be had to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sidhartha Vashisht vs. State (NCT of Delhi ), AIR 2010 SC 2352. That was a case in which the accused was tried for the offence of murder. In that case, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the appellant had been specifically targeted and maligned before and during the proceedings by the media, despite his acquittal by the Trial Court. The Apex Court while discussing the role of the media and press opined that there is a danger of serious risk of prejudice if the media exercises an unrestricted and unregulated freedom. The Court further stated that certain articles and news appearing in the newspaper immediately after the date of occurrence did cause confusion in the mind of the public. In this regard, the relevant paras are as follows: "148. Despite the significance of the print and electronic media in the present day, it is not only desirable but least that is expected of the persons at the helm of affairs in the field, to ensure that trial by media does not hamper fair investigation by the investigating agency and more importantly does not prejudice the right of defence of the accused in any manner whatsoever. It will amount to travesty of justice if either of this causes impediments in the accepted judicious and fair investigation and trial. .... 151. Presumption of innocence of an accused is a legal CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 21 of 42 presumption and should not be destroyed at the very threshold through the process of media trial and that too when the investigation is pending. In that event, it will be opposed to the very basic rule of law and would impinge upon the protection granted to an accused under Article 21 of the Constitution [Anukul Chandra Pradhan v. Union of India and Ors. (1996) 6 SCC 354]. It is essential for the maintenance of dignity of Courts and is one of the cardinal principles of rule of law in a free democratic country, that the criticism or even the reporting particularly, in sub-judice matters must be subjected to check and balances so as not to interfere with the administration of justice. 152. In the present case, various articles in the print media had appeared even during the pendency of the matter before the High Court which again gave rise to unnecessary controversies and apparently, had an effect of interfering with the administration of criminal justice. We would certainly caution all modes of media to extend their cooperation to ensure fair investigation, trial, defence of accused and non interference in the administration of justice in matters sub-judice. 153. Summary of our Conclusion: ... 11. Every effort should be made by the print and electronic media to ensure that the distinction between trial by media and informative media should always be maintained. Trial by media should be avoided particularly, at a stage when the suspect is entitled to the constitutional protections. Invasion of his rights is bound to be held as impermissible." 27. Reference may next be had to the judgment of this Court in the case of Kartongen Kemi Och Forvaltning AB & Ors. vs. State through CBI, 2004 (72) DRJ 693. In that case the public servants were charged for entering into criminal conspiracy to cheat the Government of India and cause wrongful loss to the tune of Rs.64 crores for the award of contract for supply of guns. The Court observed that after thirteen long years of investigation by the CBI no evidence has been collected against the public CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 22 of 42 servants. The Court while observing the result of trail by media held as follows: "7. This case is a nefarious example which manifestly demonstrates how the trial and justice by media can cause irreparable, irreversible and incalculable harm to the reputation of a person and shunning of his family, relatives and friends by the society. He is ostracised, humiliated and convicted without trial. All this puts at grave risk due administration of justice. 8. It is common knowledge that such trials and investigative journalism and publicity of pre-mature, half baked or even presumptive facets of investigation either by the media itself or at the instance of Investigating Agency has almost become a daily occurrence whether by electronic media, radio or press. They chase some wrong doer, publish material about him little realizing the peril it may cause as it involves substantial risk to the fairness of the trial. Unfortunately we are getting used to it. .... 13. This is one of such cases where public servants who are no more have met somewhat similar fate being victim of trial by media. They have already been condemned and convicted in the eyes of public. Recent instance of such a trial is of Daler Mehandi whose discharge is being sought few days after his humiliation and pseudo trial through media as they have not been able to find the evidence sufficient even for filing the chargesheet. Does such trials amount to public service is a question to be introspected by the media itself." 28. Similarly, reference may also be had to the judgment of the Bombay High Court in the case of Deepti Anil Devasthali and Leena Anil Devastnali vs. State of Maharashtra 2009 (111) BomLR 3981. In that case the accused were sentenced to death for abduction and murder. The appeal was filed against the conviction by the accused persons. The main attack of defence was the dishonest, shoddy and incomplete investigation by the police. The prosecution proved that the victim was made unconscious, killed and his body parts were dismembered. The police during investigation for CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 23 of 42 the recovery of body parts arranged for a camera to shoot the recovery process. The Special Prosecutor conceded that such disclosure by the Police in respect of their leads while collecting evidence affected the quality of investigation. The Court while stating that due to media interference the authenticity of the investigation is questionable held as follows: "120. ...When the investigation is in embryo stage, the police should eschew themselves from any publicity. It is high time for the police officer to understand their responsibility not to approach the media to get cheap and objectionable publicity which makes the criminal justice system not transparent but patchy and hazy. Right to information is wrongly interpreted by the police as right to inform. High degree of secrecy is a must when the investigation is in process. The publication of the matter in the print/electronic media and highhanded telecast and immature comments of the anchors of the TV media may mislead the people as public opinion is bound to be influenced by the manner the case is projected and ultimately affect the sanctity and fairness of the criminal trial. The overzealous efforts made by the prosecution to telecast the investigation i.e. discovery panchanama dilutes the investigation and lends support to the argument of the defence that the police from the beginning were not fair in the investigation." 29. Reference may be had to be judgment in the case of M.S. Ravi & Ors. MANU/KE/1298/2009. The High Court of Kerala in that case was dealing with a publication of an article relating to a case of murder of a Nun. The issue concerned was whether the article amounted to contempt of court. On the issue of media interfering with the due course of justice, the Court held as follows: "16. We notice that there is a growing tendency among the media to make comments on the merits of the cause pending before the courts, while reporting on pending proceedings. Talk shows are held even on the merits of interim orders passed by the courts. Conflicting views, even on interim orders, are CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 24 of 42 broadcast and the anchor, in some cases, finally pronounce the verdict also. Such trial by media is sure to prejudice either the prosecution/Plaintiff/Petitioner or the accused/Defendant/ Respondent. Such programmes of the media have the effect of interfering with the administration of justice and therefore, will amount to criminal contempt. The theory of our system of justice is that "the conclusions to be reached in a case will be induced only by evidence and argument in open court, and not by outside influence, whether of private talk or public print". Such programmes make a mockery of this theory against outside influence. "The right to sue and defend in courts is the alternative of force in an organised society. It is the right conservative of all other rights and lies at the foundation of orderly Government". But, the said cardinal right is being infringed by such talk shows. To keep the viewers remain glued to their programme in the evening, the channels broadcast such talk shows. But, in that process, unknowingly, the system of administration of justice of our State is being weakened and distorted. Interference even with police investigation will amount to interference with the due course of justice. Influencing the investigating officer will also amount to contempt of court....." 30. The power of the High Court to order restrain of publication in the media would clearly encompass the stage when the criminal case against the accused is at the preliminary enquiry or investigation stage also. In the light of the said position, I will now see whether facts and circumstances exists which necessitate the passing of a pre-publication or pre- broadcasting injunction against the defendants. 31. At this point let me have a look at some of the judgments relied upon by the defendant. 32. I may refer to two of the judgments filed by the defendant No.1 alongwith its paper book. First case is a judgment of the Division Bench of this High Court in the case of Khushwant Singh and Anr. vs. Maneka CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 25 of 42 Gandhi , AIR 2002 Delhi 58. In that case the High Court was dealing with a petition where a public figure claimed protection against publication under her right of privacy. The Division Bench noted that publication of the excerpts of the proposed publication had occurred much prior to the filing of the suit. In those facts the Division Bench held that private life of public figure does become matter of public interest. It was in those facts that the Division Bench held that there was no question of any irreparable loss and injury since the respondent had herself claimed damages which would be a remedy in case she is able to establish defamation. Next case is Tata Sons Limited vs. Greenpeace International & Anr. , 178(2011) DLT 705. That was a case in which the plaintiff was said to be developing an eco-friendly port. However, the defendants were raising concerns about probable dangers to the nesting and breeding of Olive Ridley Turtles by the proposed port in various quarters. It was averred by the plaintiff that the contentions of the defendant are false, frivolous and misleading on facts. It is further urged that the defendants had gone a step further and had made an online game titled „Turtle vs. TATA‟. It was urged that the impugned game and the defendant‟s use of TATA mark amounts to defamation with an ulterior motive of damaging its reputation. It was in those facts that this High Court held as follows:- "28. The English common law precedent on awarding interim injunctions in cases of defamation is set out by the case of Bonnard (supra). In Bonnard it was decided that an interim injunction should not be awarded unless a defence of justification by the Defendant was certain to fail at trial level. The Court's observations, widely applied in subsequent judgments are as follows: ...[The subject-matter of an action for defamation is so special as to require exceptional caution in CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 26 of 42 exercising the jurisdiction to interfere by injunction before the trial of an action to prevent an anticipated wrong. The right of free speech is one which it is for the public interest that individuals should possess, and, indeed, that they should exercise without impediment, so long as no wrongful act is done; and, unless an alleged libel is untrue, there is no wrong committed; but, on the contrary, often a very wholesome act is performed in the publication and repetition of an alleged libel. Until it is clear that an alleged libel is untrue, it is not clear that any right at all has been infringed; and the importance of leaving free speech unfettered is a strong reason in cases of libel for dealing most cautiously and warily with the granting of interim injunctions.... In the particular case before us, indeed, the libelous character of the publication is beyond dispute, but the effect of it upon the Defendant can be finally disposed of only by a jury, and we cannot feel sure that the defence of justification is one which, on the facts which may be before them, the jury may find to be wholly unfounded; nor can we tell what may be the damages recoverable. Again, in Fraser v. Evans [1969] 1 QB 349 Lord Denning MR stated the law as follows: The court will not restrain the publication of an article, even though it is defamatory, when the Defendant says he intends to justify it or to make fair comment on a matter of public interest. That has been established for many years ever since Bonnard v. Perryman. The reason sometimes given is that the defences of justification and fair comment are for the jury, which is the constitutional tribunal, and not for a judge. But a better reason is the importance in the public interest that the truth should out.... There is no wrong done if it is true, or if [the alleged libel] is fair comment on a matter of public interest. The court will not prejudice the issue by granting an CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 27 of 42 injunction in advance of publication...." The Court concluded that the issue which the defendant‟s game seeks to address is one of public concern. The Court held that granting an injunction would freeze the entire public debate on the effect of the port project on the Olive Ridley Turtle‟s Habitat. On those grounds, the interim injunction was declined. The facts of these two cases are entirely different from what is being said and alleged by the plaintiff in the present case. Here the issue is as to whether the acts done by the defendant are subservient and obstructing the course of justice. 33. The learned senior counsel appearing for defendant No.1 has also strongly relied upon the judgement of this High Court in the case of Naveen Jindal vs. Zee Media Corporation Ltd. and Anr. (supra) which judgment was given on 01.04.2014. As per the facts given, the case dealt with a situation where the plaintiff appears to have been contesting the elections for the third time from the Kurukshetra Lok Sabha Constituency in Haryana. It was averred by the plaintiff in that case that the allegations which were subject matter of that suit were aired by the defendants in the news programmes from 01.03.2014 and 24.03.2014 were per se defamatory and were repeated 131 times against the plaintiff which not only effected the sentiments of a particular community and caste but also done with a view to damage the prospect of the plaintiff in getting elected to the Parliament in the ensuing elections. The allegations that were levelled against the plaintiff have been reproduced hereinafter when dealing with the preliminary submissions of the defendant. 34. It was averred by the plaintiff therein that the allegations made by CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 28 of 42 the reporters of defendant No.1 against plaintiff No.1 were per se defamatory and that the defendants therein had unleashed a campaign of vilification. 35. This court, however, concluded that prima facie there may be incorrect statements or inaccurate statements which were made by the defendants which may not be to the liking of the plaintiff or which may be causing annoyance to the plaintiff therein but were not per se defamatory. Having arrived at that conclusion the Court held that to restrain the defendants from pre-telecasting of programmes or news articles or reporting the same would not only be gagging the Right to Freedom of Press but also gagging of the public to know about a candidate who is sought to be elected by its electorate. Hence, this Court in that case granted limited relief to the plaintiff whereby the defendants were directed to obtain the view of plaintiff Nos. 1 and 2 therein in case they intend to televise any programme pertaining to plaintiff No. 1 or its companies and to ensure that the interviews/comments are simultaneously reflected at the end of said programme. In my view the conclusions arrived at by the Court are based on those facts. That judgment does not have any application to the facts of the present case. 36. I will also here to deal with the preliminary objections raised by the defendant. It has been urged that the said earlier suit was filed by the plaintiff being CS(OS) 881/2014 titled Naveen Jindal & Anr. vs. Zee Media Corporation & Ors. (supra). The reliefs claimed by the plaintiff in the present suit, it is urged, are covered by the reliefs claimed in the earlier suit. The facts of that case as already elaborated were that the plaintiff was contesting the Lok Sabha Elections from the Kurukshetra Lok Sabha Constituency in Haryana. It was averred that allegations are being aired by CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 29 of 42 the defendants in their news programme which were per se defamatory and were repeated 131 times against the plaintiff. A perusal of the allegations made would show that there were several allegations most of which related to the conduct and behavior of the plaintiff as a Member of Parliament etc. The allegations which were subject matter of the said suit read as follows:- "6. In order to deal with these allegations which were leveled against plaintiff No. 1, it may be pertinent here to refer to the allegations which have been reproduced by the plaintiff, which are as under:- • Congress candidate Naveen Jindal during his campaign for 3rd inning had to face brunt of the people. The Member of Parliament could not give any answer when some people confronted him with the frauds going on since 10 years and his inability to fulfil the promises made at the time of election. • When people asked him as to why he has not fulfilled the promises made by him and people expressed their anger in this regard, then netaji became angry and started blaming the people. His security guards also misbehaved with the people. Jindal went to the extent of saying Ok don't vote for me. • You will be shocked to see Naveen Jindal caught in an imbroglio with the people of Kurukshetra which is his own constituency. But this is true. • The people of Kumhar community were voting for him on this very condition. • But see the high headedness of the Member of Parliament that he even went to the extent of saying them that they should not vote for him. If you do not believe, then listen to this. In the meanwhile, the security guards of Jindal not only misbehaved with the public but they also pushed aside all those who came to complaint. • The entire Kumhar community is extremely unhappy and rather angry on hearing such words from the mouth of their own Member of Parliament and the treatment given to them by the security guards of Jindal. They are at a complete loss to understand as to what was their fault, whether it is a crime to CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 30 of 42 ask question from their own Member of Parliament who is a liar. • Naveen Jindal could not tolerate this behaviour of theirs and you can see the manner in which he has misbehaved with the members of prajapat community. • Thereafter when he tried to raise his point in the workers meeting then he misbehaved and ignored and the body guards pushed him aside. Such kind of attitude has left a totally negative impact on the prajapati community. • Several of our correspondents have joined us. We will gather information from them and will discuss on this issue. • Generally, whenever a leader goes to public, he listens to the grievance of the people and he should talk with the people in a very polite manner. But it is not so in this case. The security guards of Jindal highly misbehaved with the local people. You can feel the impact of such an incident. • History is a witness that whenever a minor spark has risen from any area of Haryana the same has always turned into a massive demonstration. Whether it is the demonstration of JP or of Jat community or of transport employees or of farmers. Such agitations always emerge in the form of small sparks and turn into a monstrous demonstration. The witness to this is the incident of yesterday. The members of Prajapat community are not confined only in the areas of Kurukshetra or Gulachika alone but it is spread throughout Haryana in vast numbers. In Sonepat also, there are large members of this community. Voters of prajapat community play a significant role in Haryana and in this case Naveen Jindal has succeeded in reaching Lok Sabha twice due to these Kumhars. But his conduct towards them shows nothing but his high-headedness and the downfall of a person always starts from such conducts. He has started his own doom. Now it depends upon the members of the Kumhar community to make its future plans for the coming Lok Sabha Elections. • All this will definitely leave a negative impact. • You have seen the incident which has happened with a particular community. If we see the whole incident, we clearly find the high-headedness of Naveen Jindal. CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 31 of 42 • He is undoubtedly a very high-headed person and it actually shows somewhere or the other. You can see his attitude towards employees of his own company with whom they are talking. • The every effect of this defeat in the coming elections is now clearly visible on the face of Naveen Jindal and in his speeches. • Even otherwise, the attitude of Naveen Jindal is like this. Whenever we ask any question from him, he shows his high headedness. Earlier also, he had done exactly the same with our camera during a discussion with him. He had jerked the camera when our reporter tried to ask a question from him. His conduct is visible in the public also. He will have to pay for his attitude. • Public also knows how to reply the anger. Public has only one power with them which is their vote and you have seen this for yourself in the recent elections of Delhi Assembly. Now when the elections are very near, then public will definitely give its reply which will cause sleepless nights to several leaders. Public will give its fitting reply to Jindal Sahib by means of voting. • Frustration is self evident. He has won twice from this constituency and now he is here for the third time. Such a conduct on his part with the public just before the elections can cause a huge loss to the Congress party in the entire Haryana. We are receiving inputs that this prajapat community is spread in entire Haryana and it is a very strong community and that several other communities are also attached with this community. • But is he absolutely unafraid of the results. High command has given him a free hand to deal with the public in the manner he wants. • Someone will definitely question his attitude. Public will not tolerate such kind of conduct. Public will give its representative through voting and the results of Lok Sabha elections will definitely show the negative impact in the Kurukshetra. You have just seen the conduct of one kind. The CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 32 of 42 candidate will have to bear the brunt for his conduct at every cost. • It is natural that he will have to bear the brunt for his attitude. What do you think? • You must know how to talk with the public when you go to them before the elections. Public will definitely ask question from you when you fail to fulfil all those promises of developments which you had made at the time of last elections. Specially your volunteer who is widely advertising for you and whatever he is saying before the people, will be the same position with all the workers and such a situation will become the biggest problem. • His mines in Bhilwara has been cancelled or is likely to be cancelled while as he has no mines." 37. In those facts and circumstances, this Court declined to give a blanket pre-telecast restraint order. Directions were passed that the defendants therein would obtain views of the plaintiffs in case they intend to televise any program pertaining to plaintiff No.1 or his companies so that the said interview, comment or their side of the story is simultaneously reflected at the end of the said programme. 38. This suit is based on alleged defamatory publication/broad casts pertaining to a specific complaint filed by Mrs.ABC before the Chhattisgarh High Court. There are serious allegations of outraging the modesty of the lady and rape etc. As per the orders of the Chhattisgarh High Court the police is to take steps on the complaint which is filed by the said Mrs.ABC in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Lalita Kumari vs. Government of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. (supra). The earlier suit being CS(OS) 881/2014 had nothing to do with the said publications on the allegations of Mrs.ABC. This is obvious CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 33 of 42 from a reading of the allegations which are the subject matter of the earlier suit. The cause of action for the present suit is entirely different. There is no merit in the submission of the defendant that the present suit does not lie in view of CS(OS)881/2014 filed earlier by the plaintiffs. 39. I will now deal with the two other preliminary submissions of defendant No.1. One of the submissions is that the lady who has made the allegations, namely, Mrs.ABC is a necessary or proper party. A perusal of the plaint shows that there is no relief sought against Mrs. ABC. The issue is as to whether in the facts and circumstances of this case, the plaintiff is entitled to an injunction against the defendant. Relief that will be granted by this court or declined by this court is not going to affect Mrs.ABC. The said Mrs.ABC is neither a necessary nor a proper party to the present suit. The next contention raised by defendant No. 1 is that the plaintiff is guilty of suppression of material facts. In the course of arguments, the defendants have not been able to point out any material fact which would in any way have a bearing on this case which has been suppressed by the plaintiff. For the purpose of this application, there are no merits in the said submission also. 40. Coming to the facts of this case. The background of the Complaint which is lodged by Mrs.ABC is to be noted. There are certain disputes pending between the JSPL and Mrs.ABC regarding various transactions that took place regarding sale of land since 1999. Mrs. ABC filed a Civil Suit no.4A/2009 for possession of her land and claimed damages against JSPL in 2009. The Suit was decreed vide Order dated 15.03.2013. JSPL being aggrieved by the same filed an appeal which has been remanded back vide Order dated 02.01.2015. Further Mrs.ABC wrote a letter to the plaintiff dated 20.08.2008 seeking compensation for the land purchased by JSPL. On CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 34 of 42 26.07.2010 Mrs. ABC wrote a letter to the Superintendent of the Police, Chattisgarh complaining that JSPL has made unauthorized construction on the land belonging to her and also requested suitable compensation. On 18.08.2010, FIR no. 142/2010 under section 147 , 148 , 149 , 294 , 506 and 323 IPC was registered at PS Raigarh by Mrs. ABC. FIR No.143/2010 was also lodged by JSPL against Mrs. ABC on the same date. The allegations made before the Chhattisgarh High Court are that in 2001 Mrs.ABC was threatened by one Mr.D.K.Bhargava. Thereafter the said Mr.Bhargava and the plaintiff went to her house and robbed her chastity and forcibly took her thumb impression on some documents. It is further stated that on 18.8.2010 while she was standing on the road she was dragged inside the factory of JSPL where unnatural rape was committed on her. This is the nature of allegations on which an enquiry is being conducted by the Chhattisgarh Police. Steps are being taken pursuant to directions dated 6.1.2015 of the Chhattisgarh High Court. 41. Plaintiff has strenuously denied the above allegations against the plaintiff pointing out that the allegations are belated and stale, being made 12 to 14 years after the alleged incident. Further in the various proceedings earlier, no such allegation was made by Ms. ABC. 42. Another relevant fact is the running feud between the two parties. There are allegations made by the plaintiff that in 2012 an attempt to extort Rs.100 crores was made by Editors of defendant No.1 in conspiracy with the Chairman of defendant No.1 for "going slow" on the vilification campaign against the plaintiff and his company regarding reportage. It is the contention of the plaintiff that the demands of defendant No.1 were recorded by the officers of the plaintiff in a sting operation carried out at a hotel in New Delhi. Pursuant to this action, FIRs have been lodged. The details of CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 35 of 42 various proceedings which have been filed against each other have been already narrated above. 43. The plaintiffs aver that defendants have aired more than 20 defamatory and false programs against the plaintiff w.e.f. 7.1.2015 to 15.1.2015. It is averred that there have been attempts to deliberately misinterpret the orders of the Chhattisgarh High Court. Reference is made to a program aired on 13.1.2015 for a duration of 1 hour and 50 minutes where the anchor is stated to be impressing on the viewers that the police is not following the instructions of the High Court or directions of the Supreme Court. It is averred that the anchor was trying to point out as to whether the delay is on account of SSP (Raigarh), IG Police, DIG Police (Chhattisgarh), Home Secretary, Home Minister and Chief Minister. Leading questions are said to be put to the police pointing out that in an allegation of rape, an FIR is to be lodged first and the question of enquiry would not arise. Reference is also made to an interview with Additional Superintendent of Police, Mr.Prafful Kumar which are accusatory in nature and blames the police for not lodging an FIR despite order passed by the Chhattisgarh High Court. It is averred that defendants are interfering with the administration of justice and are trying to conduct a media trial and to cause deliberate harm and prejudice to the plaintiff. 44. It is urged that the publication and televising of such articles and news programmes is raising a real and imminent threat to pending fair enquiry in the matter by the police. 45. Hence, essentially the plaintiff seeks to press for an ad interim injunction based on two contentions. Firstly, that the defendants are motivated on account of the past litigation between the parties where they were caught trying to extort large amount of money from the plaintiff. CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 36 of 42 Hence, the defendants are actuated by malice and ill will towards the plaintiff. The second contention is the conduct of the defendant is such as to interfere with the administration of justice and hamper a fair enquiry. The said conduct is an intrusion to the right to open justice unbiased by any public opinion expressed in publications. It is urged that the programmes not only defame the plaintiff but also tend to interfere with the administration of justice and that the entire attempt of the defendant/its reporters is to pressurize, browbeat or hectoring/pressurize the police into lodging an FIR against the plaintiff. 46. I may at this stage take a closer look at the nature of programmes being telecast as reproduced by the plaintiff and not specifically denied by the defendant. Reference may be had to some of the questions and observations being made in the TV Programme which read as under:- "And regarding this we directly asked the Chief Minister of Chhattisgarh, Dr.Raman Singh, when the High Court has passed the order then why is the government not doing anything. Dr.Raman Singh- If the High Court has directed then there won‟t be any problem. Anchor-Rohit Sardana- Chief Minister Raman Singh doesn‟t find it necessary to say more than one line on this issue. He said that High Court has ordered so investigation will be done. But even after the order of the High Court, complaint has not been lodged, when we asked this question, no one had the answer to this. Before showing this report we tried to get the view point of Naveen Jindal on this issue. After this statement, we thought of showing you this report." Anchor-Rohit Sardana-Welcome Mr.Praful Kumar. In this case the order of High Court has come but the complaint has still not been launched. Can you tell us why? CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 37 of 42 ASP Praful Kumar- Till now we have received one application and we have given it for investigation to the related police station Tamnaar. After the investigation whatever facts are found, action will be taken accordingly. Anchor-Sir, first investigation is done and then FIR is filed or first FIR is filed and then investigation is done. ASP Praful Kumar- As you have mentioned the issue of the High Court, that‟s why I am telling. We will enquire and not investigate. And after enquiry if we find, then we will go for FIR. Reporter Shailesh Ranjan- Why is there so much delay in this case. It has already been a week since the court has given its order. Does the police usually investigates the rape cases in this way or this matter is different? ASP Praful Kumar- The matter is of 2003. It is 2015. There is so much delay. If it had been 2003, then it wouldn‟t have been the delay. Complaint has come in 2015 that is why all this needs to be done. ANCHOR- Sir, that lady claims that she has been trying to lodge the complaint since 2003 but till now it hasn‟t been done." ...... ANCHOR- We were talking to ASP Praful Kumar Thakur. He says that the court has not asked him to investigate, it has asked him to enquire. Although, it has already been a week since the court has passed its order, but the enquiry is still going on. And just think, if the police is saying that one who has complained is not found at her home so they are not able to proceed further. From this we can understand the intention of the police and the seriousness with which it wants to enquire. ..... Reporter-Devesh- The police officers are repeatedly telling a CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 38 of 42 bundle of lies because on the first day itself after the order on Wednesday when the lady reached the SP office. SP met her himself and kept her there from morning till evening. The first mistake that the police did was that they did not have a lady police present there. And even then they heard the complete story of the lady and then again the police tried to get the statement of the victim. SP left by saying that you give it in writing and then the police official did not meet the lady. And now on the phone line, the ASP said that they are regularly sending the police to the house of the victim and the statement is not being recorded. The lady is clearly telling in her statement that the goons of the company are regularly visiting her home, her family members are being threatened, her daughter is threatened to be raped, how can such a lady stay at home. As per the order of the High Court, she has been provided four security guards by the Bilaspur SP and those guards are provided by the Raigarh District police itself. The lady has been kept at a separate place to protect her from the goons. We were there for the interview and police guards were also there with the lady. Even then if the ASP says that they don‟t have information about where the lady is, clearly explains that somewhere the police is evading and is not trying to register a case." ................ Reporter-Shailesh-No Rohit. It is very much clear that somewhere the police is going slow in this case and it would be interesting to see when the police takes the next action even after the High Court gave its order one week ago. In supremacy, High Court come next to the Supreme Court, and the order of the High Court clearly says that further action should be taken in this case. We should see that. ANCHOR- Devesh...hasn‟t anyone asked the Women Commission as to why they are not coming forward in this case. Reporter-Devesh-The women Commission has constantly maintained silence on this issue. Apart from Women Commission, senior officials of the police has kept silence in this matter. Although the Chief Minister of Chattisgarh certainly said in one line that they will look into this matter. Chhattisgarh police is enquiring this matter and this matter is CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 39 of 42 under consideration and once the case is understood, investigation will be done. If the police desires, statements and enquiry, what the High Court has said, can be done in two days. But the attitude of police is such that it doesn‟t want the investigation to happen and this matter proceeds further. Even the lady is questioning as to what is that benefit due to which police is not willing to do its duty. The lady also said in her interview that constant pressure is being created by the company and the police. What is the reason that even after the order of the High Court, police is not investigating the matter. ANCHOR- Allegation of rape was made on Aasaram, he had to go to jail, Nityanand was alleged for rape, legal action was also taken against him. Rape allegation was also made on the journalist Tarun Tejpal in November 2013, legal action was taken. In June 2009 Shiney Ahuja was also charged for rape by his maid, police took action in that case also. Initially, Shiney Ahuja also said that the allegations are false and he is being framed. Afterall what is the constraint of the Chhatisgarh police that they are scared of taking action. ANCHOR- This news is brought to you by Zee News and we will keep raising question on this issue even further and keep asking the Chhattisgarh government, when they will take action in this case?" 47. The nature of the programme, the questions and observations show they are likely to prejudice the police and hamper the course of investigation/ inquiry which is being conducted by the police. I am persuaded to come to this conclusion on seeing the nature of questions being put by the Anchor in various TV programmes. As an example, I may refer to the questions of the Anchor in asking the ASP as to who is responsible for the presumed delay i.e. SSP Rai Garh, IG Police, DG Chattisgarh, Home Secretary, Home Minister or the Chief Minister. Another example is an observation by the reporter that the Women Commission and the police have maintained silence. Another example is CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 40 of 42 the observation what the High Court has said can be done in two days if the police so desire. The programmes are replete with such questions/observations. 48. The nature of questioning done by the reporters of defendants, the extent of coverage being done by the defendants does show that an attempt is being prima facie made to prod the police if not pressurize. The plaintiff have made out a prima facie case. 49. In these facts would the plaintiff be entitled to an injunction to restrain the defendants from publishing reports or airing reports pertaining to the allegations which are pending before the police by Mrs. ABC. Legal position as explained above is quite clear. Any publication which gives excessive adverse publicity to an accused or which is likely to hamper fair trial and constitutes an interference with the course of justice could be a ground for grant of injunction. The court has ample inherent power to restrain publication in media in the event it arrives at a finding that the said publication may result in interference with the administration of justice or would be against the principle of fair trial or open justice. 50. The balance of convenience is in favour of the plaintiff. Serious prejudice will be caused to plaintiff in case injunction is not granted. Accordingly, the defendants 1 and 2, their associates are restrained by an order of injunction from publishing any article or right-ups or telecasting programmes on the allegations against the plaintiff as made by Mrs. ABC either in the complaint or before the police, till the time the police completes its enquiry and, if necessary, investigation and files an appropriate report/document before the court. The injunction passed is of a temporary nature and is applicable only till the police completes its preliminary enquiry or any other investigation if required that may be done CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 41 of 42 at a later stage. However, the defendants are free to report about the court cases or about the final conclusion of the police in the course of preliminary enquiry covered under the ambit of fair reporting on the basis of true, correct and verified information. The application stands disposed of. CS(OS) 143/2015 List before the Joint Registrar on 16.04.2015 for further proceedings. (JAYANT NATH) JUDGE March 05, 2015 rb/n CS(OS) 143/2015 Page 42 of 42