Ala.Ramanathan vs Rathinasabhapathy on 2 November, 2017 Author: M.Dhandapani Bench: M.Dhandapani BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT DATED: 2.11.2017 CORAM THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE M.DHANDAPANI Crl.O.P.(MD) No.14722 of 2010 and M.P.(MD)Nos.1 and 2 of 2010 1.Ala.Ramanathan 2.V.Subramanian 3.S.Dakshina Moorthy 4.K.V.Andiyappan 5.Malaiyandi 6.Lakshmanan 7.Na.Alagu ... Petitioners -Vs- Rathinasabhapathy ... Respondent Prayer: Criminal Original petition filed under Section 482 of Criminal Procedure Code to call for the records relating to the private complaint in S.T.C.No.757 of 2010 pending on the file of the District Munsif cum Judicial Magistrate, Thirumayam and quash the same. !For Petitioners : Mr.V.Sitharanjandas ^For Respondent : Mr.B.Chandran :ORDER The petitioners are the residents of Panangudi Village, Thirumayam Taluk, Pudukottai Village. There was a dispute regarding the alleged property in Survey Nos.178/3, 179/4, 179/10, 158/4, 158/3, 159/9 and other poromboke land through which the villagers have to reach the burial ground. These petitioners claimed that they are using the poromboke land to reach the graveyard. However, the defacto complainant claimed that the property is owned by him for which the revenue official conducted Peace Committee Meeting to solve the law and order problem in the particular village. Accordingly, the Peace Committee Meeting was conducted on 06.02.2008 before the Revenue Officials / Tahsildar. In the Peace Committee Meeting, the respondent/complainant was ready to remove the fence put up by him. Accordingly, the Peace Committee Meeting ended peacefully in order to solve the law and order problem. 2.Thereafter, there was a poster alleging that the defacto complainant encroached upon the Government property with bogus patta and in view of the encroachment made by the respondent, the General Public is going to boycott the election. The said poster was affixed in the locality and it is alleged that it was affixed by the petitioners herein. Aggrieved by the same, the respondent herein filed a private complaint under Section 200 of Cr.P.C for the alleged offence under Section 499 of I.P.C, before the District Munsif-Cum-Judicial Magistrate, Thirumayam, in S.T.C.No.757 of 2010. 3.The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would submit that the petitioners are not connected with the issue as alleged by the respondent and either they are not parties in the Peace Committee Meeting or creators of the poster and there is no document to show that these persons had committed the offence under Section 499 of I.P.C. He would further submit that there is no imputation, even assuming the poster printed by the petitioners. There is no imputation as against the respondent and it is mere allegation by the people of the locality against the respondent, which is pending before the Revenue Authorities. He would further submit that in order to wreck vengeance against these petitioners, the respondent foisted a false complaint against these petitioners with an ulterior motive. 4.The learned counsel appearing for the respondent would submit that the respondent did not dispute the factual aspects with regard to the Peace Committee Meeting relating to the property in question. The Peace Committee Meeting was conducted at the instance of the petitioners. The petitioners were available in the Peace Committee Meeting and they have participated in the meeting. Admittedly, the property belongs to him. The Revenue Authorities issued patta in favour of the respondent. In order to defame the respondent, the petitioners printed the poster in the locality. It is a clear imputation and the petitioners intentionally defamed the respondent and printed the posters and he prayed for dismissal of this petition. 5.I have considered the rival submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners as well as the learned counsel appearing for the respondent. 6.The undisputed facts are that the petitioners are admittedly residents of the Panangudi Village, Thirumayam Taluk, Pudukottai District. There was a dispute with regard to the usage of the pathway by the general public with the respondent for the purpose of using the pathway leading to graveyard which was settled before the revenue authorities. Even, thereafter, the respondent did not remove the fencing, for which, the general public pasted the posters against the respondent. 7.On perusal of the poster, the sum and substance thereof is as follows: ''BOYCOTT OF PARLIAMENTARY GENERAL ELECTION Though 63 years have gone after India's independence, Panangudi Village not yet got independence. The Villagers of Panangudi Village, Thirumayam Taluk, Pudukottai District are boycotting the Parliamentary Election condemning the in-action against one S.Rethinasabapathy @ Appathurai, belonging to the same village, for encroaching their long used common pathway leading to graveyard and to cancel the bogus patta and condemning the action of the Pudukottai Revenue Divisional Officer in supporting the said S.Rethinasabapathy. BY: PUBLIC OF PANANGUDI VILLAGE'' 8.The issue involved in this case whether the poster implicating the petitioners under Section 499 I.P.C. In this context, it is relevant to extract below Section 499 I.P.C. ''499. Defamation ? Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person.'' 9.The basic requirement of implicating a person within the penal provision of Section 499 I.P.C. requires any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of such person. 10.On perusal of the poster, this Court does not find any reason for implicating the petitioners under Section 499 I.P.C. On perusal of the poster, there was no imputation as against the respondent. The general public made allegation against the respondent only with regard to the usage of the pathway and patta granted by the Revenue Authorities in favour of the respondent. I do not find any imputation words as against the respondent in the poster. Even assuming that there was imputation appearing in the posters against the respondent, there is no documentary proof or evidence adduced to establish that these petitioners defamed the image of the respondent. In the absence of the above, I do not find any merit in the complaint, implicating these petitioners for the offence under Section 499 of I.P.C. 11.In order to make out an offence of defamation under Section 499 I.P.C., it is essential to prove the existence of mens rea on the part of the accused person. In the instant case, there is no material to show that the petitioners have committed the offence punishable under Section 499 I.P.C. and the petitioners are Villagers and the posters were printed on behalf of the village people in order to boycott the General Parliamentary Election, aggrieved by the encroachment of pathway. 12.For quashing the criminal complaint, the celebrated judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court are: ( a) State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal [1992 Supp. (1) SCC 355], wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as follows;- ''102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised. (1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. (2)Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code. (3)Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused. (4)Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code. (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceedings against the accused. (6)Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceedings is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.'' ( b) R.P.Kapur Vs. State of Punjab [AIR 1960 SC 866], wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court had summarised some of the categories of cases where the inherent power under Section 482 of the Code could be exercised by the High Court to quash criminal proceedings against the accused. These are: [AIR P.869, Para 6] (i) where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the institution or continuance of the proceedings e.g. want of sanction; (ii) where the allegations in the first information report or the complaint taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not constitute the offence alleged; (iii) where the allegations constitute an offence, but there is no legal evidence adduced or the evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. ( c) Dinesh Dutt Joshi Vs. State of Rajasthan and Another [2001 (8) SCC 570], wherein, while dealing with the inherent powers of the High Court, the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed thus: (SCC p. 573, para 6) "6. ... The principle embodied in the section is based upon the maxim: quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, concedere videtur et id sine quo res ipsae esse non potest i.e. when the law gives anything to anyone, it gives also all those things without which the thing itself would be unavailable. The section does not confer any new power, but only declares that the High Court possesses inherent powers for the purposes specified in the section. As lacunae are sometimes found in procedural law, the section has been embodied to cover such lacunae wherever they are discovered. The use of extraordinary powers conferred upon the High Court under this section are however required to be reserved, as far as possible, for extraordinary cases.'' 13.Applying the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the abovesaid decisions cited supra, more particularly, Clauses (ii) and ( iii) of R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab (cited supra), which are squarely applicable to the case on hand, I have no hesitation to quash the private complaint. 14.Further, the private complaint does not make any specific allegation or implicating the penal provision against the petitioners and when there is no specific allegation with regard to commission of offence against the petitioners, this Court has no other option except to quash S.T.C.No.757 of 2010 pending on the file of the District Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate Court, Thirumayam, in respect of the petitioners. Accordingly, S.T.C.No.757 of 2010 pending on the file of the District Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate Court, Thirumayam, is quashed and the Criminal Original Petition is allowed. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed. To The District Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate, Thirumayam. .