In Re: State vs Virender Bidhuri on 2 August, 2013 IN THE COURT GAURAV RAO: METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE: SOUTH EAST DISTRICT: SAKET COURTS: NEW DELHI In Re: STATE VERSUS VIRENDER BIDHURI F.I.R. No: 40/05 U/s 382 IPC P.S. Sarita Vihar Date of Institution of Case : 06.10.2005 Date of Judgment Reserved for : 02.08.2013 Date of Judgment : 02.08.2013 JUDGMENT: (a) The serial no. of the case : 1593/2/11 (b) The date of commission of offence : 23.01.2005 (c) The name of complainant : Vivek Gupta s/o Shyam Babu Gupta (d) The name, parentage of accused : Virender Bidhuri s/o Ramphal Bidhuri, R/o Zalim Mohalla, Tugalkabad, New Delhi. Present Address :As above (e) The offence complained of : 382 IPC (f) The plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty (g) The final order : Convicted u/s 379 IPC. (h) The date of such order : 02.08.2013 FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 1/27 Brief statement of the reasons for the decision: 1. In brief the case of the prosecution is that on 23.01.2005 at about 02.30 p.m. at container yard, Kalandi Kunj, Madanpur Khadar, New Delhi within the jurisdiction of PS Sarita Vihar, accused Virender Bidhuri committed theft of property i.e. in register, out register, gate pass, bill book, out job order file, in job order file and in and our surveyor register belonging to the complainant after having made the preparation for causing death or hurt in order to commit theft as he was in possession of country made pistol at the time when he committed the theft and thus thereby the accused committed offence punishable u/s 382 IPC. 2. Charge sheet filed in the court and in compliance of Section 207 accused was supplied the documents. Thereafter vide orders dated 24.05.2012 charge u/s 382 IPC was framed against accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 3. In order to prove the charges against the accused, prosecution examined six witnesses, thereafter the PE in the matter was closed and the statement of accused u/s 313 Cr.P.C was recorded wherein he claimed himself to be innocent and having been falsely implicated in the case. A brief scrutiny of the evidence recorded in the matter is as under. 4. PW1 Vivek Anand Gupta deposed that on 23.01.2005 he was working as a Director at K.G. Logistic, Pvt. Ltd and on that day at about FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 2/27 2/2.30p.m. he along with Subhash Gupta were doing his office work in the office and in the meanwhile the accused came in a Scorpio Car bearing no. DL­3FN­0007. He deposed that the accused opened the side glasses of his car and asked him about Vishnu Gopal and he replied that Gopal was not there. He deposed that thereafter the accused gave him a phone number and asked him to give that number to Gopal to talk with him and also threatened them to stop the work. He deposed that after half an hour, the accused came back in his car and again asked why Gopal had not made a call to him and thereafter picked some registers which were lying on the table and carried those registers along with him. He deposed that when the accused was leaving the spot he spotted a pistol tied on his waist. He deposed that he has nothing else to say about this case. 5. Thereafter Ld. APP cross examined the witness after declaring him hostile. During his cross examination he admitted that he had given his complaint on 25.01.2005 vide memo Ex. PW1/A. He admitted that IO had prepared the site plan. He admitted that on 19.04.2005 IO had seized the documents vide memo Ex. PW1/B. He admitted that accused was arrested and his personal search was conducted. He admitted that IO had recorded his supplementary statement. The witness correctly identified the case property i.e. two registers and one bill book, and the same are Ex.P1 colly. 6. During his cross examination conducted by Ld. Defence counsel he FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 3/27 denied the suggestion that the car bearing no. DL­3FN­0007 does not belong to accused Virender Bhiduri. He stated that he was having a mobile at that time. He admitted that he did not make any complaint either at 100 number or in the PS. He voluntarily stated that he had made a call in the office of K.G. Logistic situated at Pul Prahalad Pur. He stated that he does not know the place where the containers were being parked. He stated that he does not know whether this land belongs to DDA. He stated that after two days of the incident he along with his owner went to the PS and lodged a complaint. Thereafter the witness was shown the certified copies of the order passed by Hon'ble High Court in W.P.(C) 13334/2005, dated 17.12.2009, Mark A wherein pictures of the structures of the company were filed and the copies of the same are shown to the witness to which he stated that the same contained the pictures of the other yard of K.G. Logistic, Container Pvt. Ltd situated at Tugalakabad. He admitted that accused Virender Bhiduri is a political person. He stated that he has no knowledge whether accused has filed various complaints to the various higher authorities about the illegal activities of the company and grabbing the DDA land. He stated that he has no knowledge whether the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi had directed the authorities to remove such illegal structures near Kalindi Kunj and Tughalakabad Yards area in a Writ Petition titled as Virender Singh Bhiduri vs. Government of NCT of Delhi and ors. He denied the suggestion that no such incident took place or the accused has been falsely implicated in this case with the connivance of his owner and local police. He denied the suggestion that due to revenge against the accused, he FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 4/27 has been falsely implicated in this case. He denied the suggestion that the accused being a political person and being a brother of Sh. Ramvir Singh Bidhuri, who was a local MLA, has been falsely implicated in this case or that he was deposing falsely. 7. PW2 ASI Jai Pal Singh deposed that on 19.04.05 he was posted as HC in PS Sarita Vihar and on that day he had joined the investigation of the present case with IO/SI Aditya Ranjan. He deposed that he along with IO reached the Patiala House Court in the court of Ld. MM Sh. S.K. Aggarwal. He deposed that IO took permission from the Ld. MM S.K. Aggarwal to produce the accused Virender Bidhuri in the concerned court i.e. Ld. MM Ms. Nivedita Anil Sharma. He deposed that after taking the permission from the concerned court, IO formally arrested the accused and conducted his personal search vide memo Ex. PW2/A and 2/B. He deposed that IO obtained one day PC remand of the accused and theraeafter accused was put in the lock up of Kalkaji. He deposed that on that day evening, at about 8.00 p.m. he along with IO and complainant and accused reached Suraj Apartment, Flat no. 1, MIG Flats where the accused got three registeres recovered and IO seized the Registers vide memo Ex. PW1/B. He deposed that thereafter they all came back at Kalkaji Lockup and the accused was again put behind the bar. He deposed that IO recorded his statement to this effect. 8. During his cross examination he stated that they reached Kalkaji FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 5/27 Lockup at about 4.30 p.m. He stated that IO did not conduct any proceedings pertaining to this case from 4.30 p.m. To 8.00 p.m. He stated that complainant did not reach the Kalkaji Lockup and he accompanied them while going to the house of accused. He stated that IO recorded the departure entry from Kalkaji Lockup. He stated that the complainant met them in the PS. He stated that he cannot tell at what time they reached the house of accused. He stated that IO had called the neighbourers to join the investigation but they did not agree. He stated that he cannot tell whether IO had written their names and address or not. He stated that he cannot tell at what time they reached the PS. He stated that IO had recorded the arrival entry in the PS. He stated that IO recorded his statement as well as the statement of the complainant in the PS on the very same day. He denied the suggestion that he had falsely implicated the accused in the present case on the instance of the IO or he was deposing falsely. He denied the suggestion that he had never joined the investigation of the present case with the IO. He denied the suggestion that nothing was recovered from the possession of the accused or that recovery has been planted upon the accused. He denied the suggestion that he was deposing falsely. 9. PW3 Subhash Gupta deposed that on 23.01.2005 he was working as Crane Supervisor in Container Yard Kalindi Kunj and on that day, at about 2.30 p.m., he was sitting in his office along with Director Sh. Vivek Gupta and in the meanwhile, one Scorpio car no. 007 came outside of the office. He deposed that the accused was sitting on the driver seat of the Scorpio and the FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 6/27 accused opened the glass of the vehicle and asked for Gopal. He deposed that the Director Vivek Gupta replied that Gopal was not present there and the accused asked him to stop the work and further threatened to him not to carry on the work. He deposed that thereafter accused left the place. He deposed that after half an hour, accused again came at the spot and stated that Gopal did not call him and started abusing. He deposed that some documents which were lying in the office were taken by the accused and kept the same inside the Scorpio car. He deposed that when the accused was in the process of sitting in his car he noticed a revolver was dangling with his waist and thereafter he went away. 10. During his cross examination he admitted that at that time Vivek Gupta was having his mobile phone. He stated that there is a busy road outside the office. He stated that Vivek Gupta made a call to office immediately after accused had left the place. He stated that those registers were pertaining to in­register, out­register Crane register etc. He stated that today those registers are not available in the court and he has not seen them. He stated that when the abovesaid registers were taken away by the accused, after then he had never seen them till today. He stated that he does not know as to who had informed the police. He stated that the above said office does not pertain to DDA and the same belongs to Vivek Gupta. He again said that it was on rent. He stated that he does not know whether any rent agreement was executed with regard to the said land. He denied the suggestion that the said FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 7/27 land belongs to DDA. He stated that he does not know whether any cases were filed by accused against Vivek Gupta either in the Hon'ble High Court or before other higher authorities. He stated that he does not know whether accused had filed various complaints against the misuse of DDA land by Vivek Gupta. He stated that the colour of the Scorpio car was silver. Thereafter the document Mark A was shown to the witness and after seeing the photographs witness stated that the said container yards are situated at Tuglakabad and not at Kalindi Kunj. He denied the suggestion that no such incident took place or Vivek Gupta with the connivance of the police had falsely implicated the accused in the present case. He stated that Vivek Gupta is his cousin. He denied the suggestion that being a relative he was made a witness in this case. He denied the suggestion that he was deposing falsely. 11. PW4 SI Chaman Singh deposed that on 23.01.2005 he was posted as ASI in PP Madanpur Khadar, PS Sarita Vihar and on that day on receipt of DD no. 10, he along with Ct. Sriram reached the spot i.e. Container Yard, Kalindi Kunj where Vivek Gupta met him who told him that accused Virender Bidhuri came in a Scorpio car and threatened him and took away some documents from him. Vivek Gupta did not give him his complaint at that time and asked him that he will discuss the matter with his brother. He deposed that on 25.01.2005, Vivek Gupta came in the PS and lodged a complaint vide memo Ex. PW1/A. He deposed that he put his endorsement on the same vide memo Ex. PW4/A and got registered the FIR. He deposed that he went to the FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 8/27 spot along with the complainant and prepared the site plan vide memo Ex. PW4/B. He deposed that he had recorded the statement of witnesses. He deposed that he tried to search for the accused but he could not be traced. He deposed that thereafter the case was transferred from him. 12. During his cross examination he stated that on 23.01.2005 he reached the spot at about 3.15 p.m and came back at PS after half an hour. He stated that he cannot say whether the said land of the container yard belongs to Vivek Gupta or DDA Land. He stated that as the spot is inside the DDA Land, so there was no public person who witnessed the said incident. He stated that the complainant came to the PS at about 7.30 p.m. He stated that except this, he did not investigate further in the present case. He stated that he along with complainant reached the spot at about 8.45 p.m. He stated that he did not obtain the signature of the complainant on site plan. He denied the suggestion that with the connivance of complainant, he got fabricated this case registered against the accused. 13. PW5 Const. Shree Ram deposed that on 23.01.2005 he was on emergency duty from 08.00 a.m. to 08.00 p.m. at PP Madanpur Khadar JJ Colony PS Sarita Vihar and on that day at about 02.30 p.m. a PCR call was received which was reduced in DD no. 10. It was regarding one Scorpio car coming to an office at Kalandi Kunj Extension, New Delhi and some documents had been taken away in the said car and in pursuant to said call he along with FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 9/27 ASI Chaman Singh reached at the spot. He deposed that there they met Vivek Gupta s/o Shyam Babu Gupta. He deposed that IO conducted interrogation with him and came to know that accused Virender Bidhuri came in one Scorpio car no. DL3FN0007 and asked for one Gopal but since he was told that Gopal was not there Virender Bidhuri instructed him to get Gopal call to him on his mobile within half an hour. He deposed that Vivek Gupta also told the IO that after half an hour Viredner Bidhuri came in the said Scorpio and took away in and out register, gate pass, job in register file and other documents etc. He deposed that he further told that he would give the complaint later on after asking the senior officers. He deposed that on 25.01.2005 Vivek Gupta came at PP Madanpur Khadar and gave written complaint to the IO ASI Chaman Singh. He deposed that IO wrote tehrir on it and sent him to the PS with the rukka at about 08.30 p.m. He deposed that he got the FIR registered and came back at Container Yard, Kalandi Kunj where he handed over the copy of FIR and original rukka to the IO. He deposed that in the meanwhile IO ASI Chaman Singh and Vivek Gupta had already reached at Container Yard, Kalandi Kunj. He deposed that he joined the investigation and IO recorded his statement. 14. During his cross examination he stated that he left the PP at 03.00 p.m. and reached the spot within 10 minutes. He stated that they remained at the spot for about half an hour. He stated that IO did not record his statement on 23.01.2005. He stated that IO never recorded his statement which he has given in his examination in chief from portion A to A. He admitted that IO recorded the FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 10/27 statement of complainant Vivek Gupta which he has stated in his examination in chief from portion A to A. He admitted that he did not accompany the IO in search of the accused Virender or to recover the alleged stolen goods. He stated that IO did not ask the complainant Vivek Gupta to accompany him in order to arrest the accused or to recover the alleged articles on 23.01.2005. He admitted that he had not seen the accused at any time prior to today in the court. He again said that he knows the accused in his personal capacity as he was doing his duty in the area. He admitted that as the accused in this case he had never seen him. He stated that they reached in the PP at about 04.00 p.m. on 23.01.2005. He stated that he does not know whether IO gave this information to the SHO on that day. He stated that IO recorded his arrival and departure in the DD register on 23.01.2005. He stated that he does not know whether the IO has placed it on record the arrival and departure entry. He stated that Vivek Gupta reached in the Police post on 25.01.2005 at about 07.30 p.m. along with his written complaint. He stated that he came back at Container Yard, Kalandi Kunj at about 09.30 p.m. and he remained there along with IO and Vivek Gupta for about one hour. He stated that IO recorded his statement and also recorded the statement of Vivek Gupta the Container Yard, Kalandi Kunj. He stated that no efforts were made by IO to arrest the accused Virender Bidhuri or to recover the alleged stolen goods during this one hour. He stated that they left the container depot at about 10.30 p.m. and reached the PP at about 10.30 p.m. along with complainant. He stated that IO recorded his return in the police post in the DD register. He stated that IO did not record the said factums in his statement. He denied the suggestion that FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 11/27 he was deposing falsely and make the statement as cock and bull story today in the court. 15. PW6 SI Aditiya Ranjan deposed that on 19.04.2005 he was posted as Chowki Incharge Madanpur Khadar P.S. Sarita Vihar and on that day on receipt of DD no. 14 vide which he came to know that the accused was being produced at the court of Sh. S.K. Aggarwal, M.M. Patiala House courts. He deposed that he reached there along with HC Jaipal and he obtained the permission from the said court to produce the accused in the court of PS Sarita vihar. He deposed that he interrogated the accused and he formally arrested the accused vide arrest memo Ex. PW2/A. He deposed that he obtained one day PC remand of the accused. He deposed that the accused was lodged at PS Kalkaji. He deposed that prior to it he was again interrogated. He deposed that at around 08.00 p.m. the accused was taken out from the lock up and taken to his office at Pul Prahlad pur, Suraj Apartments. He deposed that there three registers were lying on the shelf in the said office and on the pointing out of the accused same were recovered from there vide Ex. PW1/B. He deposed that at the time of recovery he was accompanied by complainant Vivek Gupta, HC Jaipal and Constable Chaman. He deposed that they came back to PS kalkaji and lodged the accused in the lockup. He deposed that accused was produced in the court next day and he was remanded to judicial custody. He deposed that thereafter he was transferred. FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 12/27 16. During his cross examination he stated that he cannot tell the exact time when he left the Police Post and reached in the court. He stated that he does not remember today exact time when he left the court and reached PS Kalkaji. He stated that the entire procedure took around 3 hours. He stated that he had made the arrival as well as the departure entry at the PS, copy of same is not available on record. He stated that complainant had accompanied them from the court itself. He stated that statement of the complainant was recorded regarding recovery of the registers at the spot. He denied the suggestion that no such statement of the complainant was recorded. He stated that no statement of the complainant was recorded after coming from the court. He stated that he does not know who had informed the complainant about the production of accused in the court. He stated that he had made a departure entry regarding taking of the accused from PS to the spot. He stated that he does not remember the DD number. He admitted that no such DD is available on judicial file. He stated that they had reached his office at about 09.00 p.m. approximately. He stated that when they reached the office the same was opened and they came to know from the neighbourhood that the boy who was present at the office had just left. He stated that he had called people from the neighbourhood/vicinity but none came forward. He admitted that no public person was joined in the investigation at that time except for the complainant. He stated that he did not note down the names of public persons whom he requested to join the investigation and who refused. He admitted that no action was taken against those public persons who refused to join the investigation. He admitted that no FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 13/27 notice was given to them. He stated that they remained at the office for about 1 hour. He stated that the complainant did not come back to the PS from the spot. He stated that he cannot tell the exact time when they came back at the spot. He stated that he had recorded his return in the DD register but the same is not annexed with the judicial file. He stated that he has no knowledge whether the accused lodged complaints to the higher authorities including CVC, LG, CP and other high authorities regarding the illegal position of the DDA land to the public. He stated that he is not aware whether any writ petition was filed by the accused against Vivek Gupta in Hon. High Court of Delhi. He stated that he had met Vivek Gupta many times in connection with the present case. He stated that he has no personal relations with him. He stated that he is not aware about the status of the land wherein the office of the accused was situated. He admitted that numerous offices of containers were situated in the area. He stated that he had not made any inquiry regarding the containers which were parked/stored/Godown there despite the fact that he was the Chowki Incharge. He stated that he had not gone into the much details of the registers. He denied the suggestion that he was deposing falsely. He denied the suggestion that he has falsely implicated the accused. He denied the suggestion that this is a false case. 17. This so far is the prosecution evidence in the matter. 18. I have heard the arguments advanced at bar by the learned Defence FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 14/27 counsel as also learned APP, have carefully gone through the evidence recorded in the matter and perused the documents placed on record by the prosecution in this case. 19. After hearing the rival contentions raised at bar as well as on careful scrutiny of the material on record, I am of the considered opinion that the prosecution has successfully brought home the guilt against the accused for having committed offence u/s 379 IPC. 20. It stands duly proved from the deposition of complainant Vivek Anand Gupta and eye witness Subhash Gupta whose testimonies were duly corroborated by other prosecution witnesses that accused Virender Bidhuri had indeed committed theft of registers/documents from the office of/possession of the complainant on 23.01.2005. 21. The present prosecution was launched on the complaint of Complainant Vivek Anand Gupta who was examined as PW1. During his testimony the complainant categorically proved that on 23.01.2005 while he was working as Director at KG Logistics Pvt. Ltd and was present at his office with Subhash Gupta accused Virender Bidhuri came there in Scorpio car bearing no. DL3FN0007 and asked for Vishnu Gopal. He further proved that accused threatened them to stop work and directed them to ask Vishnu Gopal to call him. He further proved that after sometime accused came again and asked them why FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 15/27 Vishnu Gopal had not called him and he took away the registers which were lying on the table. He went on to prove his complaint in this regard as Ex. PW1/A and also identified the registers recovered from the possession of accused on 19.04.2005 vide Ex. PW1/B as Ex. P1. Hence he categorically proved the incident in question as well as established the identity of the accused as the perpetrator of the crime. 22. Testimony of complainant Vivek Gupta was duly corroborated by eye witness Subhash Gupta who was examined as PW3. Subhash Gupta deposed on the same lines as deposed by PW1. He proved the incident in question as was proved by Vivek Gupta and also identified the accused correctly. 23. Prosecution witnesses namely ASI Jaipal Singh (PW2), SI Chaman Singh (PW4), Const. Shree Ram (PW5) and IO SI Aditya Ranjan (PW6) lend further credence to the prosecution case. SI Chaman Singh proved that on 23.01.2005 i.e. on the day of incident he received DD no. 10 regarding the incident in question upon which he along with Const. Shree Ram reached the spot where complainant Vivek Gupta narrated to them the incident in question. He further deposed that on 25.01.2005 complainant came to the PS and got the complaint Ex. PW1/A registered upon which he made endorsement as Ex. PW4/A and got the FIR registered. He also proved the site plan of the incident Ex. PW4/B. ASI Jaipal Singh PW2 and SI Aditya Ranjan (PW6) proved the arrest of the accused on 19.04.2005 vide Ex. PW2/A and B and the recovery of the FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 16/27 stolen registers from his office vide Ex. PW1/B. 24. During the course of arguments, Ld. Defence Counsel had vehemently argued that the prosecution had miserably failed to bring home the guilt against the accused. Ld. Defence Counsel attacked the prosecution story on many counts. 25. It was argued that at the outset there is delay of around 2 days in registration of FIR. It was argued that the incident occurred on 23.01.2005 but the FIR was registered only on 25.01.2005 i.e. after two days. This period of two days as per the Ld. Defence counsel itself proves that the entire story is concocted one. However I do not agree with the Ld. Defence counsel. Merely because there was a delay of two days in the registration of FIR that by itself does not mean that the prosecution story is a false one or that the complainant and eye witness were deposing falsely. Firstly the law is well settled that there is no ritualistic formula of throwing away the prosecution story merely on account of delay in FIR. It is a settled proposition of law that delay if duly explained can be condoned and ignored. Reliance may also be placed upon the law laid down in case titled as Sohan Singh v. State of Bihar 2009 V AD (Cri) (SC) 261, Basudeo Yadav v. Surendra Yadav & Ors. , (SC) 2009 A.I.R. (SC) 546, State of Himachal Pradesh v. Gian Chand, (SC) 2001(2) R.C.R.(Criminal) 666, Harbans Kaur v. State of Haryana, (SC) 2005(3) J.T. 233, Harpal Singh v. Devinder Singh, (SC) 1997 Cri.L.J. 3561, Ramanbhai Naranbhai Patel v. FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 17/27 State of Gujarat, (SC) 2000(1) R.C.R.(Criminal) 93 , Zahoor v. State of U.P., (SC) 1991(Sup1) S.C.C. 372, Jayakanth v. State of Karnataka 2009 Cri.LJ 1224, State of HP v. Prem Singh 2009 Cri.LJ 786, Jamallu v. State of Rajasthan 2008 Cri.LJ 816. In State of Himachal Pradesh v. Gian Chand, (SC ) 2001 (2) RCR (Crl) 666 it was further held: Delay has the effect of putting the Court in its guard to search if any explanation has been offered for the delay, and if offered, whether it is satisfactory or not. If the prosecution fails to satisfactorily explain the delay and there is possibility of embellishment in prosecution version on account of such delay, the delay would be fatal to the prosecution. However, if the delay is explained to the satisfaction of the Court, the delay cannot by itself be a ground for disbelieving and discarding the entire prosecution case. Explanation does mean that each and every hours delay has to be explained. 26. Secondly, I find no delay as far as the reporting of the matter/incident to the police is concerned. It is not the case wherein the complainant/aggrieved party remained silent regarding the alleged crime/incident. In fact it is a matter of record that the incident was immediately/promptly reported to the police. The incident is of 23.01.2005 and it was immediately reported to the police vide DD no. 10. The said DD entry is on record as was proved by SI Chaman Singh and Const. Shree Ram. I have perused the said DD entry. Apart from DD no. 10 there is another DD entry on record i.e. DD no. 11 also of 23.01.2005. In both of above DD entries which were based on PCR call/wireless FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 18/27 message it was categorically recorded that the occupant of Scorpio car no. DL3FN0007 had taken away the registers/documents from the Kalandi Kunj Container Yard. Upon receipt of above DD entries SI Chaman Singh (PW4) and Const. Shree Ram (PW5) went to the spot where they met complainant Vivek Gupta who narrated the entire incident to them. However no FIR was registered as complainant Vivek Gupta wanted to first discuss the matter with his brother before getting a formal FIR registered. Same was categorically proved by PW4 and PW5 as above. I find nothing wrong in the same. There are numerous consideration which need not be discussed herein which might weigh with an individual before he finally makes up his mind to initiate formal legal action against an offender/culprit. To cite a few as pointed out by Ld. APP the very fact that accused is a politically active person involved in around 4 other FIRs i.e. no. 909/04 u/s 279 / 323 / 341 / 506 IPC P.S. OIA, FIR no. 102/05 u/s 386 / 387 / 34 IPC P.S. Sangam Vihar, FIR no. 73/05 u/s 279 / 323 / 341 / 506 IPC P.S. Sangam Vihar etc. might have forced the complainant to think twice before getting a formal FIR registered against him. In the case at hand the aggrieved party had made known their grievances/reported the incident to the police but when it came to the registration of FIR the complainant sought time to consult his brother. I find nothing shoddy/suspicious in the same. The very fact that the incident was immediately reported to the police vide the above two DD entries itself rules out false implication. 27. It was further argued by Ld. Defence counsel that though the FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 19/27 prosecution alleged that the accused came to the spot in his Scorpio car bearing registration number DL3FN0007 however prosecution could not connect the said car with the accused. It was argued that during the investigation that IO made no efforts to either seize the car or collect the RC and other documents of the car in question to connect the same with the accused. However I differ with Ld. Defence counsel. At the outset I am of the opinion that it was not incumbent upon the prosecution to connect the accused with the car. The nature of offence is such that the involvement of the car is insignificant. Had it been a case of accident the prosecution was bound to connect the car with the accused. Nonetheless mere fact that IO did not seize the car or its documents and thus the prosecution could not place on record the documents of the car in question to connect the same with the accused does not imply that the prosecution witnesses were deposing falsely or that this is a false case. The law is well settled that an accused should not be allowed to go scott free or the complainant be disbelieved for defective/faulty/negligent investigation (Balwant Singh v. State of Haryana, (SC) 1995 A.I.R. (SC) 84 and Amar Singh Vs. Balwinder Singh 2003 AIR SCW 717). Every faulty investigation or padding in evidence cannot by itself lead to total demolition of prosecution case if it can otherwise stand ignoring these fallacies. ( Lakshmi v. State of UP (SC ) 2002 (4) R.C.R. (Criminal) 82). Mere faulty investigation cannot be made basis of acquitting the accused when sufficient evidence is available to nail him (Ram Parshad v. State of Haryana, (P & H) (DB) 1992(3) R.C.R (Criminal) 231). In Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh v. State of Gujrat (SC), 2004 (4) S.C.C 158 and State of UP v. FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 20/27 Jagdeo (SC) 2003 A.I.R. (SC) 660 , the Hon'ble Apex Court held that accused should not be acquitted solely on account of the defect in investigation. To do so would tantamount to playing into hands of investigating officer if investigation is designedly defective. 28. It was also argued by Ld. Defnece counsel that prosecution failed to bring on record any independent eye witness of the incident in question. It was argued that apart from the complainant, his brother and police officials prosecution could not produce on record any independent public person as IO had not joined any independent witness either of the incident dated 23.01.2005 or at the time of recovery of alleged registers from the possession of/instance of accused on 19.04.2005. It was argued that the complainant and the police were in collusion with each other and falsely implicated the accused as the accused had filed complaints against the complainant and other illegal occupants of the DDA land who were carrying on the business of cargo containers which was causing undue inconvenience/harassment to the villagers as well as led to immense traffic jam. In the Tughalkabad area/around the spot of incident/occurrence. It was argued that it was in response to/in retaliation to the compliant filed against them that the complainant in collusion with police official falsely implicated the accused. It was argued that this is the reason why no public person was joined in the investigation by the IO. Hence Ld. Defence counsel had argued that in the absence of any independent corroboration the accused cannot be held guilty. However I find no merits in the said contentions FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 21/27 of the Ld. Defence Counsel. To begin with in my opinion the testimony of complainant Vivek Gupta and eye witness Subhash Gupta is itself sufficient to nail the accused. There was no need for any further corroboration. As per the Indian Evidence Act no specific number of witnesses are required to prove a fact and a fact can be proved even by one witness whether he is official or independent public witness depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case. Law requires that evidence has to be weighed and not counted (Ambika Prasad and Ano. Vs State 2002 (2) CRIMES 63 (SC) and Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab, (P&H) 1995(2) R.C.R.(Criminal) 475. 29. It is well settled principle of law that it is the quality of evidence that matters and not the quantity/number of witnesses. Section 134 of the Indian Evidence Act does not require any minimum number of witnesses to be examined for proving a particular fact ( Sunil Kumar V. State Govt. of NCT of Delhi SC 2004 (1) Criminal CC 524, Krishna Mochi and others Vs. State of Bihar, (2002) 6SCC 81). Moreover the court/judges cannot sit in an ivory tower of isolation and ignore the fact that there is a tendency amongst witnesses in our country to wash off their hands/desist from joining/assisting the investigation. The Court has also held that civilized people withdraw both from the victim and the vigilante and they keep them selves away from the Court unless it is inevitable. 30. In Jawahar v. State, (Delhi ) 2007(4) R.C.R.(Criminal) 336 it was further observed that (1) It is very hard these days to get association of public FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 22/27 witnesses in criminal investigation and (2) Normally, nobody from public is pre­ pared to suffer any inconvenience for the sake of society. Reliance may also be placed upon the law laid down in Amar Singh V. Balwinder Singh (SC ) 2003 (1) RCR Criminal 701) 31. The testimony of both the complainants was duly corroborated by the police officials and it is well settled now that there is no rule of law that police official/official witnesses ought not to be believed/relied upon. Police official/official witnesses do not suffer from any disability to give evidence and their official capacity by itself does not create any doubt about their credit worthiness. They cannot be presumed to be less or more reliable then any other normal public witness. Reliance may be placed upon Izzazul V. State (Delhi) 2007 (4) RCR Criminal 315 and Kala Singh v. State of Haryana, (SC) 1995 A.I.R. (SC) 1948 . 32. As far as the defence arguments regarding non joining of independent public person at the time of recovery of alleged registers from the possession/at the instance of the accused is concerned it will be worth highlighting here that as pointed out by Ld. APP the accused who is a social/ political leader is allegedly involved in more than dozen criminal cases ranging from simple hurt to kidnapping to attempt to murder. In fact at one point of time there were more than 3 FIRs registered against him for attempts to murder. I am of the firm opinion that no one from the public would have agreed/dared to join FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 23/27 the investigation/recovery and thus become a witness against the accused thereby inviting his enmity/hostility. The public which is already reluctant to aid the police cannot expected to aid them against a man who is involved in heinous cases of kidnapping and attempt to murder. Nonetheless in the case at hand the recovery of the registers from the office of accused was effected in the presence of complainant Vivek Gupta. It stands proved from the deposition of complainant i.e. PW1 as well as the IO SI Aditya Ranjan (PW6) that the registers were recovered from the office of accused at his instance. The accused was arrested from the court of then Ld. M.M. Sh. S.K. Aggarwal and he was formally interrogated and while on his PC remand granted by the court he was taken to his office at Pul Prahlad Pur, Suraj Apartments from where the registers were recovered and seized vide Ex. PW1/B. 33. As far as the pending litigation is concerned no doubt that there was a pending litigation between the parties at the time of incident however that does not by itself prove that the accused has been falsely implicated and that it is a false case. Defence could not prove or establish any connivance between the police officials or the complainant. In fact the very fact that the FIR in the case was registered after almost 2 days of the incident itself rules out the alleged collusion. As discussed above the incident which occurred on 23.01.2005 was immediately reported to the police however the FIR was only registered only on 25.01.2005. Had it been a case of collusion to falsely implicate the accused then in my opinion the FIR would have been registered on 23.01.2005 itself. FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 24/27 34. It was also alleged by Ld. Defence counsel that one Mr Gopal who was the owner of Logistic Pvt. Ltd. with whom the complainant and the eye witness were employed with was not arrayed as a witness by the prosecution and his absence/omission creates further doubts upon the prosecution case. It was argued that as per the allegations/complaint the accused had threatened the complainant and warned them to ask Mr. Gopal to talk to him and on failure/in non compliance of the same the accused took away the registers from the office. It was thus argued that he was the material witness whose omission renders the prosecution story unreliable. However, I find no merits in the above contentions of Ld. Defence counsel. In my opinion Mr. Gopal was not a material/essential witness and his absence has in no way created any doubt whatsoever upon the prosecution story. Firstly, Mr. Gopal was not present at the office at the time of incident. His having not witnessed the incident, thus his testimony if he was cited as a witness by the prosecution would at best be hearsay evidence which is a very weak piece of evidence. Secondly, he was no way directly involved in the entire incident i.e. to say that neither the accused had a talk with him nor he threatened him nor the registers were taken away from his possession. No doubt he was the owner of M/s Logistics Pvt Ltd. However the registers though they belonged to his company were taken away from the possession of the complainant. For a case of theft possession and not ownership is a criteria. The documents were taken away/removed from the possession of the complainant and thus he was the aggrieved party. FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 25/27 35. Hence in view of my above conclusion it stands proved that the accused had committed theft of the registers belonging to the complainant/from his possession. However the criminality/act done by the accused only makes him liable u/s 379 IPC and not under section 382 IPC for which he has been facing trial. Reason being firstly, the alleged gun which the accused was carrying was never seized by the IO during the course of investigation. In fact there is nothing on record on suggest that the accused possessed the gun as alleged by the prosecution. Secondly, neither the complainant nor the eye witness even once stated during their deposition that the gun which the accused was allegedly carrying was raised in the air or shown to them or pointed towards them. The only significant deposition in this regard came up during the deposition of PW1 who has stated that "when the accused was leaving the spot, I spotted a pistol tied on his waist". Similarly PW2 stated that "when the accused was in the process of sitting in his car, I noticed a revolver was dangling with his waist". This does not bring the case within the purview of section 382 IPC. In fact till the time the accused was leaving the spot neither the complainant nor the eye witness had noticed the gun. Moreover as discussed above neither the gun was seized/recovered during the investigation, nor any documents were collected to connect the same with the accused. In fact it is not clear as to whether the gun was a licensed one or a illegal arm because if it was a licensed gun he was entitled to carry the same. FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 26/27 36. Accordingly, in view of my above discussion, accused is held guilty under section 379 IPC. 37. I order accordingly. 38. Copy of the judgment be given to the accused free of cost. 36. Let he be now heard on the point of sentence separately. Announced in the open (Gaurav Rao) Court on 02.08.2013 MM (SE)/Delhi. FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 27/27 FIR No. 40/05 State Vs. Virender Bidhuri 28/27