Raveen Thukral And Others vs Shri Ram Niwas on 8 November, 2013 Author: Inderjit Singh Bench: Inderjit Singh IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 (O&M) Date of decision: November 08, 2013 Raveen Thukral and others ...Petitioners Versus Shri Ram Niwas, IAS, Ex-Home Secretary, U.T. Chandigarh ...Respondent CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE INDERJIT SINGH Present: Mr.R.S.Cheema, Senior Advocate with Mr.R.K.Trikha, Advocate for the petitioners. Mr.Akshay Bhan, Advocate for the respondent. **** INDERJIT SINGH, J. Petitioners Raveen Thukral, Ajay Shukla, Ashutosh Partap Singh and Yog Raj Sharma have filed this petition against Shri Ram Niwas, IAS, Ex-Home Secretary, U.T. Chandigarh under Section 482 Cr.P.C,. for quashing complaint filed under Section 199 Cr.P.C. for the offences under Sections 500 , 501 , 502 IPC, the summoning order dated 09.08.2010 passed by learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Chandigarh summoning the petitioners under Sections 500 and 501 IPC and order dated 27.07.2011 passed by learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Chandigarh in criminal revision No.289 of 08.12.2010 along Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -2- with all subsequent proceedings arising therefrom. The brief facts as stated in the petition are as under:- All the petitioners are employees of Aaj Samaj/India News, a newspaper published from Chandigarh. Petitioner No.1 is the Editor- in-chief of Hindi Newspaper, whereas petitioner No.2 is the City Editor, petitioner No.3 is the Page Editor and petitioner No.4 is the Press Correspondent of the Hindi Newspaper Aaj Samaj. All the petitioners are accused in the above-stated complaint which was filed through Public Prosecutor. It is alleged by the complainant that the news item published on 11.07.2010 on the front page of Chandigarh Edition under the caption "Khatron ko Manage Kar Rahe Greh Sachiv Aur Salahkaar" (Risks are managed by the Home Secretary and Advisor) are blatantly defamatory and scandalous and the same has been published with the intention to malign and defame the image of the complainant. It is further stated in the petition that a careful perusal of the above-stated news item clearly shows that it is stated therein that "the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) and the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) have been looking on the activities of the Administration. The U.T. Advisor Pardeep Mehra and the Home Secretary, both are now on the net of Investigation Agencies. The Agencies are continuously busy in collecting facts in this regard. Due to apprehension of its wrath falling any time, both the officers are busy in managing their respective roles. In this connection they are out of station for the last two days and are engaged in fortifying their defence by meeting all the bigwigs in Delhi. The U.T. Administrator Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -3- Shivraj Patil is in Nainital these days. In order to discuss all matters of the Administration, both the officers are planned to go to Nainital and opted the route via Delhi. Reason behind this strategy is considered to be the hotting up of issues of Teachers recruitment scam causing benefit worth crores of rupees to some people by reviewing own orders, causing gain to some particular individuals in case like partial distribution of Atta worth crores of rupees received for general Ration Card Holders. Complaints about all these are pending with the CVC and the CBI. In all cases, role of senior officers is doubtful. According to sources, apart from the CBI and CVC, both the officers have also insisted on B.Bhamthi, Joint Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs in Delhi for finding some way out for defence and have stated their role beyond doubt. All arguments have been put forth in self defence in Teachers Recruitment Scam involving game of crores of rupees. The Advisor Pardeep Mehta, as an Appellate Authority, adopted dual policy and by reviewing previously passed orders, without having powers, had resorted certain properties. This is being considered to be a very serious matter. Since in all cases, the Investigation Agencies are serious, both the officers are busy in managing the same. When talked to both the officers in this regard, they refused to comment." Learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Chandigarh vide order dated 09.08.2010 summoned all the petitioners as accused to face trial for the offences under Sections 500 and 501 IPC. Learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Chandigarh dismissed the revision-petition Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -4- filed by petitioner No.2 Ajay Shukla against the summoning order. In reply, respondent denied the averments and contested the petition. At the time of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the complaint has been filed under Section 199 Cr.P.C. by Public Prosecutor but without any sanction and not as per the provisions of Section 199 Cr.P.C. Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that Public Prosecutor was not competent to file complaint or to pursue complaint as also held in the revision petition. Learned counsel for the petitioner also argued that newspaper report nowhere saying that allegations are established. He next argued that the case falls under second exception to Section 499 Cr.P.C. and Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act. He further argued that no allegations are levelled against the Chief Editor etc. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent argued that the present complaint cannot be held to be filed under Section 199 Cr.P.C. Mere mentioning of Section 199 Cr.P.C. in the complaint is not enough to say that this complaint has been filed under Section 199 Cr.P.C. No procedure has been adopted which is prescribed under Section 199 Cr.P.C. Heading of the complaint also shows that it has been filed in personal capacity. The only irregularity is that this complaint was filed through Public Prosecutor instead of an advocate, which irregularity has already been corrected by engaging an advocate. Learned counsel for the respondent further argued that Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -5- the perusal of the press report shows that it has been published to malign the reputation of the senior officers of the Administration by giving wrong facts intentionally. The benefits of second exception to Section 499 Cr.P.C. and Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act are not available in the present case. Before issuing the summoning order, the court is to see whether there is sufficient ground to proceed against the respondents or not. On the basis of preliminary evidence, the Court summoned the present petitioners. After going through the record and after hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that Annexure P-1 is the copy of the complaint. The heading of the complaint states that complaint has been filed under Section 199 Cr.P.C. for the offences punishable under Sections 500 , 501 and 502 IPC. It has been filed by Ram Niwas, IAS, Home Secretary, U.T. Chandigarh. This complaint is stated to be filed by the complainant through Public Prosecutor. Section 199 Cr.P.C. provides as under:- 199. Prosecution for defamation. (1) No Court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence: Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the Court, make a complaint on his or her behalf. (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code, when any offence falling under Chapter XXI of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) is alleged to have Gulati Vineet been committed against a person who at the time of 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -6- such commission, is the President of India, the Vice- President of India, the Governor of a State, the Administrator of a Union territory or a Minister of the Union or of a State or of a Union territory, or any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the Union or of a State in respect of his conduct in the discharge of his public functions a Court of Session may take cognizance of such offence, without the case being committed to it, upon a complaint in writing made by the Public Prosecutor. (3) Every complaint referred to in sub- section (2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably sufficient to give notice to the accused of the offence alleged to have been committed by him. 1. Ins. by Act 46 of 1983, s. 5. (4) No complaint Under sub- section (2) shall be made by the Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction- (a) of the State Government, in the case of a person who is or has been the Governor of that State or a Minister of that Government; (b) of the State Government, in the case of any other public servant employed in connection with the affairs of the State; (c) of the Central Government, in any other case. (5) No Court of Session shall take cognizance of an offence under sub- section (2) unless the complaint is made within six months from the date on which the offence is alleged to have been committed. (6) Nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having jurisdiction or the power of such Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence upon such complaint. The perusal of this Section itself shows that this complaint has not been filed in the Court of Sessions but filed under Section 199 Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -7- (6) Cr.P.C . in the court of Magistrate. This complaint has been filed by the complainant through Public Prosecutor. The complaint is not filed by the Public Prosecutor. Again, the complaint has not been filed after taking previous sanction from the State Government etc. The complaint also shows that complainant himself has filed this complaint. There is only irregularity that this complaint has been filed through Public Prosecutor instead of an advocate. This fact has already been taken note of in revision order passed by learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Chandigarh in para No.11, wherein it is stated that it was wrong on the part of the Public Prosecutor to prosecute this complaint on behalf of the complainant but this infirmity is only an irregularity and not an illegality. It is also held by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Chandigarh that proceedings taken by the Magistrate cannot be said to have been vitiated simply for the reason that the complaint being filed and pursued by the Public Prosecutor. As argued, this irregularity has already been corrected and the private advocate has been engaged. Therefore, as neither any previous sanction has been obtained from the State Government nor the complaint was filed by the Public Prosecutor nor the complaint has been filed in the Court of Sessions, therefore, this complaint has not been filed under provisions of Section 199 (2) Cr.P.C., rather, it has been filed under Section 199(6) Cr.P.C., where it is stated that nothing in this section shall affect the right of the person against whom the offence is alleged to have been committed, to make a complaint in respect of that offence before a Magistrate having jurisdiction. Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -8- As regarding the fact that in the head note of the complaint, Section 199 Cr.P.C. has been written, it is settled law that mere mentioning of wrong section is simply a technicality and does not affect the substantial rights of any of the party. Therefore, from the above, I find that this compliant has not been filed under Section 199 Cr.P.C., rather filed by the complainant through Public Prosecutor in individual capacity before the Judicial Magistrate. As regarding next argument, the perusal of the report published in the newspaper itself shows that it is defamatory in nature. The complainant is a senior officer of U.T. Administration and the heading of the news itself shows the malafide intention to defame the Home Secretary and Advisor. In the heading it is written as "Khatron ko Manage Kar Rahe Greh Sachiv Aur Salahkaar". The perusal of the news report itself shows that this report has been published with the intention to malign and defame the image of the complainant as it is defamatory and scandalous in nature. It is not necessary that the news report must show that allegations have been established. As regarding the second exception to Section 499 (2) IPC, it provides as under:- "Second exception- Public conduct of public servants.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further." The perusal of the above provision itself shows that it is Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -9- not defamation if any opinion is expressed in good faith regarding the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public duties. But as already discussed, the perusal of the heading of the report itself shows that it has been published with the malafide intention to defame the complainant. Therefore, at the stage of summoning at least, no benefit can be given. At the stage of summoning, on the basis of preliminary evidence, the Court is only to see whether there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused or not. The perusal of the complaint and the preliminary evidence shows that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the present petitioners. Learned counsel for the petitioners cited judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra vs. Dr.R.B. Chowdhari and others , AIR 1968 SC 110. I have gone through this citation and the same will not apply in the present case as in the present case in the complaint in para No.2, it is written that petitioner No.1 is the Editor-in-chief of Hindi Newspaper, whereas petitioner No.2 is the City Editor, petitioner No.3 is the Page Editor and petitioner No.4 is the Press Correspondent. In para No.4 of the complaint, it is written that accused-petitioners No. 1 to 4 got published the news on the front page of Chandigarh Edition and the contents of the said items are blatantly defamatory. The same have been published with the intention to malign and defame the image of the complainant. The allegations have been levelled against the petitioners. It is during the defence that accused-petitioners can Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -10- produce evidence by showing as to which accused is not aware regarding this report or the presumption not arising against him. In the complaint, all the accused have been named who published the news report. Learned counsel for the petitioners further cited judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sri Harasingh Charan Mohanty vs. Surendra Mohanty , AIR 1974 SC 47. I have gone through this citation and the same having distinguished facts will not apply in the present case as in that case , the case is under representation of the People Act and in that case it was held that corrupt practice by agent who is not an election agent, petitioner must prove that it was committed with consent of candidate. Learned counsel for the petitioners also cited judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Haji C.H. Mohammad Koya vs. T.K.S.M.A. Muthukoya , AIR 1979 SC 154. In this case, this presumption under Section 7 held not applicable to Chief Editor of newspaper, who is not shown to be its Editor as defined of Section 1 (1) . In the present case, the petitioners are yet to prove as to who have been shown as Editor as per this Act. Learned counsel for the petitioners further cited judgments passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in K.M.Mathew vs. State of Kerala and another , AIR 1992 SC 2206 and K.M. Mathew vs. K.A. Abraham and others , 2002 (6) SCC 670 on the same point. I have gone through these above-mentioned citations and the same having distinguished facts will not apply in the present case. Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh CRM No.M-21533 of 2012 -11- Learned counsel for the petitioners further cited judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jawaharlal Darda and others vs. Manoharrao Ganpatrao Kapsikar and another , 1998 SCC 815. I have also gone through this citation and the same having distinguished facts will not apply in the present case as it is already discussed that the heading as well as the report looks defamatory in nature and cannot be held as accurate and true report. Learned counsel for the petitioners further cited judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in The Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and others vs. Cricket Association of Bengal and others , AIR 1995 SC 1236. I have gone through this citation. This citation is also regarding freedom of speech and expression which includes the right to acquire and disseminate information. This citation will not apply to the facts of the present case. Learned counsel for the petitioners further cited judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande and others vs. Uttam and another , (1999) 3 SCC 134. I have gone through this citation and the same having distinguished facts will not apply in the present case as in that case it is held that under Section 499 IPC, no case of defamation is made out, which are not the facts of the present case. In view of the above, finding no merit in the present petition, the same is dismissed. November 08, 2013 (INDERJIT SINGH) Vgulati JUDGE Gulati Vineet 2013.12.21 17:22 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh