That On 11.04.2012 At About 10.30 Pm When ... vs State Of Punjab on 30 September, 2014 IN THE COURT OF MS.PURVA SAREEN, METROPOLITAN MAGISTERATE­01, SOUTH, SAKET COURT, NEW DELHI State v. Bhim Singh FIR No.97/12 PS Fatehpur Beri U/s 356 IPC JUDGMENT Date of Institution : 21.05.2012 Date of Commission of offence : 11.04.2012 Name of the complainant : Tarun S/o Sh. Chander Bhan Name & address of the accused : Bhim Singh S/o Sh. Mangal Singh R/o H.No.216, Village Jonapur, New Delhi Offence complained of : 356 IPC Plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty Final Order : Convicted U/s 356 IPC Date of reserve for judgment : 16.09.2014 Date of announcing of judgment : 30.09.2014 The case of the prosecution in brief is as under :­ 1. That on 11.04.2012 at about 10.30 pm when the complainant was present at MG Road, he was using his mobile phone Nokia. Suddenly a black colour Discover Motorcycle stopped near him. The pillion rider approached him and State v. Bhim Singh Page 1 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri asked to hand over his mobile. On refusal he pointed out towards pocket of his shirt which was looking heavy. The complainant got scared. In the meantime, accused snatched the mobile phone and ran away along with co accused on the said motorcycle. Complaint was made to the police. On 13.04.2012 complainant went to PS and got his statement recorded. FIR was registered. Mobile phone was recovered from the possession of the accused Ajay Mohan Vir after his apprehension at the instance of secret informer along with motorcycle Discover bearing no.DL­3SCA­2744 being driven by co accused Bhim Singh who was also arrested on the basis of disclosure of accused Ajay Mohan Vir. 2. Investigation was done. The charge sheet was filed against both the accused persons Ajay Mohan Vir and Bhim Singh u/s 382/411/34 IPC . Complete set of documents were supplied to the accused persons. Prima facie charge u/s 382/411/34 IPC was framed against both the accused persons by ld. Predecessor Court vide order dt.22.06.2012 to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Thereafter, the matter was listed for prosecution evidence. 3. Accused Ajay Mohan Vir was running in custody during the proceedings of the case and accused Bhim Singh sought continuous exemptions on the State v. Bhim Singh Page 2 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri ground that he was under treatment in Nasha Mukti Kendra. Hence, learned Predecessor Court proceeded with the case qua accused Ajay Mohan Vir and he was convicted by learned Predecessor Court vide her separate judgment dated 15.10.2012. In the present judgment, I shall discuss the offence committed qua accused Bhim Singh only. 4. The prosecution in support of its case examined six witnesses as under :­ (i) PW1 Tarun was the complainant who deposed before the court that on 11.04.2012 at about 10.30 pm he was standing at MG Road and was carrying his mobile Nokia. Two boys approached him on a motorcycle make Discover (Blue and Black colour). The pillion rider asked for his mobile and on refusal he pointed out towards pocket of his pant which was looking heavy. Accused Ajay Mohan Vir snatched his mobile and he along with Bhim Singh who was driving the motorcycle ran away from the spot. Witness further deposed that his father and brother also reached at the spot. He was scared and therefore did not inform the police at that time. After discussion with his family he made complaint to the police. After sometime , the exact day witness did not remember, he received call from the police regarding recovery of his mobile. He got released the same on superdari from the court. Witness correctly identified both accused persons and case property State v. Bhim Singh Page 3 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri before the court. In his cross examination by ld. Defence counsel for the accused Bhim Singh it is stated by witness that he did not make any PCR call as he was not having mobile. PCR call was made through the mobile of his brother but he did not remember the police official who approached him after PCR call. Witness further stated that he was not scared but his family members had advised him not to report the matter to the police. The accident had occurred near Metro Pillar No.150 to 151. He did not remember the exact date but after 13.04.2012 his statement was again recorded by the IO. It was dark on the spot. Witness further stated that he was not able to have proper look of the person who was driving the motorcycle due to darkness. Witness denied that accused was falsely implicated in this case. (ii) PW2 O.P. Dhingra was the owner of the shop Prakash Communications who deposed before the court that on 14.05.2012 police asked him for record of bill bearing no.R002294 of Nokia 700 worth Rs.17,000/­. He made endorsement on the bill. In his cross examination by ld. Defence counsel for accused Bhim Singh it is admitted by witness that he had not generated the said bill and all invoices generated through computer by the sales person of his shop. It has been further admitted by witness that by looking at the bill he cannot say to State v. Bhim Singh Page 4 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri whom it was issued. (iii) PW3 HC Umesh deposed before the court that on 11.04.2012 on receipt of DD No.39A he along with other police official whose name he did not remember, went to MG Road where complainant Tarun met them. The complainant got perplexed and did not give his statement. On 13.04.2012 complainant came to PS and his statement was recorded. Tehrir was prepared and FIR was got registered. Original rukka and copy of FIR was handed over to IO HC Mahavir. He along with IO and complainant went to CRC Chowk where secret information was received to IO. Thereafter he along with IO and secret informer went to Prakriti Marg at 4 pm. IO requested 4­5 public persons to join the investigation but none agreed. At about 4.45 pm one motorcycle bearing no.DL­3SCA­2744 (Bajaj Discover) came and it was signaled to stop. Motorcycle was stopped and the name of driver was revealed as Bhim Singh and pillion rider was Ajay Mohan Vir. On cursory search one mobile Nokia 700 (Black colour) was recovered from Ajay Mohan Vir from his right pocket of pant and four other mobiles were found from a plastic bag holding by Ajay Mohan Vir. Accused Ajay Mohan Vir was interrogated and his disclosure statement was recorded. The motorcycle and Nokia mobile were taken into possession. Both accused persons were arrested and their disclosure statements were recorded. Case State v. Bhim Singh Page 5 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri property was deposited into malkhana. IO recorded his statement. Witness correctly identified the accused and case property before the court. In his cross examination by ld. Defence counsel it is stated by witness that he did not make any departure entry. He left the PS at about 11 pm and reached at the spot pillar no.50 at about 11.20 pm. No other person met them except Tarun. The complainant told about the incident but did not give his statement as he was scared. He did not remember his arrival entry. There was no shop around the pillar no.50. The complainant came to PS on 13.04.2012 at 8 am. Rukka was prepared at about 8.30 am. He went to CRC Chowk, Sultanpur along with IO at about 3.30 pm and thereafter at Prakarti Marg at about 4 pm. HC Mahavir prepared site plan in his presence as well as presence of complainant. On 13.04.2012 he came back to PS at about 8 pm. No toy gun ever recovered at the instance of any of the accused. The complainant never handed over any mobile bill to IO in his presence. Accused Bhim Singh was not wearing helmet at the time when he was apprehended. The accused persons were arrested at Prakriti Marg barricade at about 5.10 pm and 5.40 pm arrest memos were prepared at the spot. He along with accused persons and IO came back at PS at about 8 pm and thereafter he was relieved from duty after recording his statement. From 5 pm to 8 pm accused persons were at police barricade. Mobile State v. Bhim Singh Page 6 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri phones were switched off at the time of seizing. No sim card was recovered. Counsel for the accused has brought on record document Ex.PW3/DA which is DD No.9B dated 12.04.2012 lodged at PS FP Beri. The witness admitted that its contents are correct and that he had himself lodged the said DD entry. It is further admitted by witness that there is no mention in DD that any threat to the complainant or that he was scared. In a question by learned defence counsel it is answered by witness that he did not remember as to what statement he had given during his cross examination on 17.08.2012 and also the contents of the DD no.9B. It is admitted by witness that he did not record any statement of the complainant on 11.04.2012 and that no call details of the mobile of the complainant was obtained even though it was mentioned in the Ex.PW3/DA. Voluntarily stated that further investigation of present case was marked to another IO HC Mahavir. The secret informer met HC Mahavir at CRC Chown in his presence and informed about the alleged accused persons. He along with HC Mahavir went to CRC Chowk at about 3 pm. He did not know the difference between CRC chowk and PS FP Beri and Sultanpur. He was with HC Mahavir at 10 am and 12 O' clock and at 2 pm and 4 pm and 6 pm on 13.04.2012. In re examination by learned APP for the state witness stated that he did not mention the factum of Tarun being perplexed in DD No.9B as he had State v. Bhim Singh Page 7 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri to attend many other calls. (iv) PW4 HC Mahabir Singh deposed before the court that on 13.04.2012 investigation of present case was marked to him by SHO concerned. He along with complainant Tarun, HC Umesh and Ct. Prasant went to the spot and prepared site plan at the instance of complainant. Accused persons were arrested and their personal search was conducted. Disclosure statement of accused persons were recorded. Motorcycle and Nokia Mobile were seized. Four other mobiles were also seized. Witness correctly identified the accused persons and case property before the court. In his cross examination by ld. Defence counsel for accused Bhim Singh it is stated by witness that investigation was handed over to him at about 9 am. He came back at PS after investigation at about 8 pm. He accompanied the complainant to the place of incident and prepared site plan and recorded his supplementary statement. It is admitted by witness that he cannot show the place where the accused was allegedly apprehended or articles were seized. He did not remember the pillar number. Witness further admitted that he did not mention in any of DD that complainant had accompanied him to the spot. Ct. Prasant was not made witness but the accused persons were interrogated in his presence. Site State v. Bhim Singh Page 8 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri plan of place of arrest was not prepared. The accused persons were riding without helmet. Accused persons were not booked under MV Act . Witness denied that complainant did not hand over any bill pertaining to mobile. It is admitted by witness that he had not mentioned regarding the joining of public witness anywhere in his investigation. Witness further stated that he did not got conducted the mechanical inspection of the motorcycle bearing no.DL­3SCA­2744. It is admitted by witness that he along with HC Umesh and Ct. Prashant left the PS with the complainant on 13.04.2012 at about 9 am and came back to the PS at about 8 pm. During this period they had visited Sultanpur, the site of incident and the place of arrest i.e. Prakarti Marg. The secret informer met him at CRC Chowk, Sultanpur. He had not made any DD entry qua the information received from secret information. Witness further stated that he did not remember whether HC Umesh or Ct.Prashant were carrying mobiles. It is denied by witness that he was throughout carrying his mobile and he never went to conduct any investigation or that visited the place of occurrence on 13.04.2012. Witness further stated that at 3 pm hewas at CRC Chowk and 6 pm he was at Prakarti Marg. At Prakarti Marg there was a police barricade and police booth was made later on. He cannot say whether any security guard employed by the RWA was always present on the spot or not. State v. Bhim Singh Page 9 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri (v) PW5 SI Rajender was duty officer who proved the FIR vide memo Ex.PW5/A and endorsement thereupon vide memo Ex.PW5/B. In his cross examination by ld. Defence counsel for accused Bhim Singh it is stated by witness that the FIR was registered on the instruction of SHO concerned. The FIR was typed at about 8.32 am on computer by Ct.Ram Prasad at his instructions. IO did not inform about the details of suspect and hence these were not filled in the FIR. (vi) PW6 HC Gulab Singh deposed before the court that on 06.05.2012 he received the case file of present case from MHCR. On 14.05.2012 he went to E2/2, Prakash Communications and got the bill of phone mark A from O.P. Dhingra. His statement was recorded u/s 161 CrPC and thereafter he came to Saket Court where he met complainant and complainant identified both the accused persons produced in the court. Supplementary statement of complainant was recorded. JC remand of accused was extended till 21.05.2012. He came back at PS and recorded the statement of HC Umesh. Charge sheet was prepared and filed before the court. In his cross examination by the ld. Defence counsel for accused Bhim Singh it is denied by the witness that he manipulated the statement u/s 161 CrPC. He did not make any effort to recovery the toy gun. It is admitted by witness that no seizure memo pertaining to the bill mark A had been filed on State v. Bhim Singh Page 10 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri record. Complainant Tarun was not called by him in the court on 14.05.2012. 5. Thereafter, PE was closed and statement of accused Bhim Singh u/s 313 CrPC was recorded to which accused Bhim Singh pleaded himself innocent and preferred to lead defence evidence. In his defence evidence accused Bhim Singh examined four witnesses as under :­ (i) Bhim Singh examined himself as DW1 u/s 315 CrPC and deposed before the court that on 12.04.2012 at about 11.30 pm police officials namely HC Mahavir and HC Umesh along with other police officials came at his house along with Ajay Mohan Vir and took him to the police station along with his bike which was not in a running condition as its engine was defective. The police officials kept him at PS from 12.04.2012 till 14.04.2012 morning. They produced him in the court on 14.04.2012 afternoon. On 13.04.2012 in the morning the complainant Tarun was called to the police station and he was shown to him. In his cross examination by ld. APP for the state it is stated by witness that he did not make any complaint before any authority regarding aforesaid incident and harassment made by police officials. He was not present with accused Ajay Mohan Vir on 11.04.2012. (ii) DW2 Rohtash deposed before the court that he is real brother of alleged State v. Bhim Singh Page 11 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri accused and reside with him. On 12.04.2012 at about 11.30 pm police officials HC Umesh and HC Mahavir along with some other police officials came at his house along with one Ajay Mohan Vir. They took his brother to the police station along with his bike. He along with his cousin elder brother namely Om Prakash went to the police station to inquire about the about. There the police officials told them that they had to conduct some inquiry and after questioning they would release his brother. They stayed there for quite sometime. In the morning of 13.04.2012 they said that the senior police officials would come and release his brother but his brother was not released and kept in the police station on 13.04.2012. On 14.04.2012 his brother was produced in the court and HC Mahavir told them to get him release from court. In his cross examination by learned APP for the state it is stated by witness that he did not make any complaint before any authority regarding aforesaid incident and harassment made by police officials. His brother was not present with accused Ajay Mohan Vir on 11.04.2012. On 11.04.2012 his brother was at home at night from 7 pm onwards. Nobody came to meet his brother on the night of 11.04.2012. (iii) DW3 Yogesh deposed before the court that on Prakrati Marg at the entrance there was a police post and two guards were always stationed at State v. Bhim Singh Page 12 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri that point during day and night. These guards used to present at that point and are stationary. At that point there was a police barricade also. Even on 13.04.2012 our two guards were positioned at Prakarti Marg near the police barricade and police post which were together. Ld. APP for the state did not prefer to cross examine the witness. (iv) DW4 Ravi Vansh deposed before the court that he was Supervisor of Lion Guards and Secure Services and Pvt. LTD. which is owned by Vijay Lohiya. They used to supply Guards to Sultan Pur Farms Welfare Association. Their guards were permanently stationed on Prakarti Marg at police post during day and night. These guards were always present at that point and were stationary. At that point there was a police barricade also. Even on 13.04.2012 their guards were positioned at Prakarti Marg near the police barricade and police post which were together. Ld. APP for the state did not prefer to cross examine the witness. 6. Thereafter, DE was closed and argument addressed by Ld. APP for the state and ld. defence counsel for accused Bhim Singh. 7. It has been argued by learned counsel for the accused Bhim Singh that accused Bhim Singh has been falsely implicated in this case. He has State v. Bhim Singh Page 13 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri referred to various judgments of hon'ble Supreme Court of India to substantiate his arguments. 8. It has been argued by learend counsel for accused that it is held by hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case Jamshed Hormusji Wadia v. Board of Trustees, Port of Mumbai & Anrs. , AIR 2004, SC 1815, the apex Court observed that the Court is concerned with substantial justice and prevent to perpetuate grave injustice to parties and whenever the order is one which shocks the conscience of the Court or suffers on account of disregard to the form of legal process or violation of the principles of natural justice provided by the statutory provisions, the Court must interfere. In Ashutosh v. state of Rajasthan & Ors., AIR 2005 SC 3434, the apex Court held that substantial justice must be given preference over technicalities and Court must do justice at all costs and at the same time the Court should not forget that justice should be tempered with mercy. 9. It is the cardinal principle of criminal justice that fouler the crime higher the proof required. A golden thread which runs through the web of administration of criminal justice is to the effect that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence the latter is to be adopted. In Ravinder Singh v. State v. Bhim Singh Page 14 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri State (NCT) of Delhi reported in 197(2013)DLT99, it was held that "it is well settled that the prosecution, must stand or fall on its own legs and it cannot derive any strength from the weakness of the defence. It has been held by hon'ble Supreme Court in Simon v. State of Karnataka (2004) 2 SCC 694 that evidence of mere identification of an accused person at the trial for the first time is from its very nature inherently of a weak character. The purpose of a prior test identification is to test and strengthen the trustworthiness of that evidence. Courts generally look for corroboration of the sole testimony of the witnesses in court so as to fix the identity of the accused who are strangers to them in the form of earlier identification proceedings. This rule of prudence, however, is subject to exception, when, for example, the court is impressed by a particular witness on whose testimony it can safely rely, without such or other corroboration. Whether the identification of an accused for the first time in court in absence of any test identification parade can be made the basis of the conviction depends upon the facts and circumstances of th case. No hard and fast rule can be laid down. 10.It has been held in case of Sadhu Singh v. State of Punjab 1997(3) Crime 55 the hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court "In a criminal trial, it is for the prosecution to establish its case beyond all reasonable doubts. It is for State v. Bhim Singh Page 15 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri the prosecution to travel the entire distance from may have to must have. If the prosecution appears to be improbable or lacks credibility the benfit of doubt necessarily has to go to the accused". In case Anoop Joshi v. State, 1992(2) CCC 314 (HC), hon'ble High Court of Delhi has observed that "it is repeatedly laid down by this Court that in such cases it should be shown by the police that sincere efforts have been made to join independent witnesses. In the present case, it is evident that no such sincere efforts have been made, particularly when we find that shops were open and one or two shopkeepers could have been persuaded to join the raiding party to witness the recovery being made from the appellant. 11. I have heard the arguments of learned defence counsel for accused Bhim Singh in detail and also gone through the case law cited by him. After hearing the arguments of the counsel for accused Bhim Singh and going through the documents on recording following observations are being made :­ the accused Bhim Singh has been charge sheeted under section 382 IPC read with section 411 IPC. As per section 382 IPC "whoever, commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the committing of such theft, or in order to the retaining of property taken by such theft, shal State v. Bhim Singh Page 16 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri be ...". 12.Now let us put up the facts of the complaints under the definition of section 382 IPC. As stated in the definition in order to attract the provision of section 382 IPC, there has to be preparation for causing death or hurt or restraint or fear of death to any person in order to commit such theft or in order to effect escape after commission of theft, in order to restraint the property by such theft. The complainant in his statement as well as in the rukka has very clearly stated that when the accused pointed out towards his shirt he felt that the accused was carrying some weapon with him but the complainant did not see the accused taking out any weapon or showed it to the complainant. Even later on, no recovery of any weapon was effected from either of the accused. The accused snatched the mobile phone from the hands of the complainant and the complainant evidently got scared on seeing pocket of the accused which looked heavy. It is also stated that accused pointed out towards his pocket but the complainant did not mention in his statement regarding used of any words by the accused to show that he was carrying any weapon which could cause any harm, hurt or death to the complainant. 13.Therefore, in my considered opinion, section 382 IPC is not made out in this State v. Bhim Singh Page 17 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri present circumstances. However, in my opinion there has been snatching of the mobile phone of the complainant which is form of assault or criminal force in attempting to commit theft of property carried by a person which is expressly covered under section 356 IPC. The witness/complainant PW1 Tarun is the only eye witness of the offence. He has stated the facts coherently which have been corroborated by other witnesses of prosecution. 14.Further, the testimony of the complainant/eye witness has efficacy and relevancy. They have no reasons to omit real culprit and implicate falsely the accused. It is a well settled law that once the eye version is given particularly by the complainant himself, the Court would normally rely upon such version of the prosecution unless it suffers from serious infirmities or improvements. ( Balbir Singh V. State of Punjab, (P&H ) 2003 Cri.L.J. 3148). 15.In case State of Gujarat v. Bharwad Jakshibhai Nagribhai, (Gujarat) (DB) Cri.L.J. 2531 it was observed that while appreciating evidence of the witnesses it has to be kept in mind that their presence at the time and place of the occurrence cannot be doubted. They do not have any reason to omit real culprits and implicate falsely the accused persons. State v. Bhim Singh Page 18 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri 16.Hence, I convict the accused Bhim Singh under section 356 IPC. 17. As far as section 411 IPC is concerned, no recovery had been effected from the accused Bhim Singh and there is no document on record to show that any recovery had been effected from the accused Bhim Singh. Hence, the accused Bhim Singh stands acquitted for the offence under section 411 IPC. 18.Now to come up for hearing on the point of sentence on 15.10.2014. Announced in the open court (PURVA SAREEN) th on 30 September 2014 MM­01/SOUTH/SAKET COURT NEW DELHI State v. Bhim Singh Page 19 FIR No.97/12, PS Fatehpur Beri