CR Cases/2033206/2016 on 30 July, 2018 IN THE COURT OF MS. SALONI SINGH, METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­02, MAHILA COURT, SAKET COURTS, SOUTH DISTRICT, NEW DELHI FIR No: ­ 248/2013 (2033206/2016) Under Sections: ­ 354D/506/509/500 of Indian Penal Code , 1860 Police Station: ­ Saket CNR No: ­ DLST02­000764­2013 State v. Anshul Rawat, Aged 25 years, S/o, Sh. Manohar Singh Rawat, R/o, H. No. 28, Madangir, New Delhi. ...Accused Date of Institution :­ 23.08.2013 Date of Reserving order :­ 27.07.2018 Date of Judgment :­ 30.07.2018 Final Order :­ Acquitted Judgment: ­ The accused Anshul Rawat was sent to stand trial for offence punishable under Sections 354 ­D and 506 of Indian Penal Code , 1860 (for short, " IPC ") and Section 66 ­ A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (" IT Act ") based on the First Information Report (F.I.R.) dated 15.06.2013 registered at Police Station (P.S.), Saket Delhi. 1. After registration of the said FIR, the Investigating Officer (I.O) during investigation arrested the accused on 15.06.2013 and conducted his personal CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 1/20 search on the same day and released the accused on police bail with surety of like amount, obtained the Consumer Application Form (CAF) and Call Detail Record (CDR) of mobile number xxxxxxxx99 for the period between 01.06.2013 to 30.06.2013, got recorded the statement of the complainant under Section 164 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, " CrPC ") and the statement of all the witnesses was recorded under Section 161 of the said Code. On completion of the investigation the charge­sheet was filed on 23.08.2013 and on taking cognizance, the accused was summoned for 31.10.2013. On appearance of the accused copy of the entire charge­sheet was supplied to him in compliance with Section 207 of CrPC. Opportunity was granted to the accused to make submissions on charge. After having heard the submissions made and having perused the court record, based on a prima facie case, charges under Sections 354D / 506 / 509 / 500 of IPC were framed against the accused. The charges were read over and explained to the accused, to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 2. The brief facts of the case as per the prosecution version are that the accused had been threatening and following the complainant over a long period of time. It is alleged that the accused had threatened the complainant that if she did not become friends with him, he would make it difficult for the complainant to live in her own house and that he would throw acid on her and stab her with a knife. Further it is alleged that the accused had defamed the complainant by spreading rumors in the neighbourhood that the complainant was his girlfriend and that he had had physical relationships with her. That the accused used to send vulgar messages to the complainant and on 13.06.2013 the accused had given the complainant four missed calls CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 2/20 on her mobile phone. It is alleged that because of the accused the complainant was forced not to step out of her house to avoid any untoward incident. 3. In evidence the prosecution examined the complainant as PW­1, mother of the complainant as PW­2, friend of the complainant as PW­3, father of the complainant as PW­4, brother of the complainant as PW­5, Nodal Officer (Vodafone) as PW­7 and police officials including I.O. as PW­6, PW­8, PW­9 and PW­10 and relied upon and placed on record the following documents, namely, complaint dated 14.06.2013 as Exhibit PW­1/A, statement of the complainant recorded under Section 164 of CrPC as Exhibit PW­1/B, arrest memo and personal search memo of the accused as Exhibit PW­6/A and Exhibit PW­6/B respectively, CAF and CDR of mobile no. 8xxxxxxx99 as Exhibit PW­7/A and Exhibit PW­7/B with supporting certificate issued under Section 65 ­ B of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short, " Evidence Act ") as Exhibit PW­7/C, CAF and CDR of mobile no. 7xxxxxxx99 as Exhibit PW­8/A and Exhibit PW­8/B with supporting certificate issued under Section 65 ­B of Evidence Act as Exhibit PW­8/C, Cell identity chart as Exhibit PW­8/D, reply to notice (issued under Section 91 of CrPC) as Exhibit PW­8/E and FIR no. 148/13 as Exhibit PW­10/A. The prosecution witnesses were cross­examined by the Learned Advocate for the accused. Thereafter, on completion of the prosecution evidence the accused was examined by the Court under Section 313 read with Section 281 of CrPC, wherein all incriminating material relied upon by the prosecution was put to the accused, which were denied by him CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 3/20 and the accused stated has stated that he and the complainant were friends, however, due to quarrels between them over some issues they had stopped talking to each other. He has further stated that on the day of incident he had by mistake dialed the mobile phone number of the complainant after which the mother of the complainant had called him and had abused him and threatened to file false complaint against him. 4. In defence the accused examined only his friend as DW­1 to prove that the accused and the complainant were friends and that the complainant had few times gone out with the accused. No other witness was examined by the accused and the defence evidence was closed. Final arguments were advanced on behalf of the State and the accused. Learned Assistant Public Prosecutor (APP) for the State submitted that there is coherency in the testimonies of all the prosecution witnesses and the ingredients of Sections 500, 506, 509 and Section 354­D of IPC have been proved by the prosecution. On the other hand, Learned Advocate for the accused has argued that no case is made out against the accused as the complainant has not given any specific dates of the alleged incidents. It is submitted there is no record of any messages or phone calls allegedly exchanged between the complainant and the accused despite the complainant's allegation that the accused had been harassing her since the year 2009. Further, Learned Advocate for the accused drew the attention of the Court to the CDRs placed on record of mobile numbers 8XXXXXXX99 of Vodafone and 7XXXXXXX99 of Aircel by PW­7 and PW­8 respectively for the period between 10/06/2013 to 20/06/2013 and 01/05/2013 to 30/05/2013 respectively and argued that the prosecution has not identified in them any CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 4/20 record of the alleged calls/messages exchanged between the said mobile numbers. Learned Advocate for the accused has submitted that the accused himself has admitted during his examination under Section 313 of CrPC that on the day of the complaint, he had by mistake dialed the mobile number of the complainant, however, after a few minutes it was the mother of the complainant who had called him back on his mobile number and had abused him and threatened to file a complaint against him. It is argued that while in the statement of the complainant recorded under Section 164 of CrPC the complainant has alleged that on the night of 13.06.2013 she had received four missed calls from the mobile number of the accused and that the accused had also sent her a text message, the complainant in her testimony has stated that on 13.06.2013 the accused had called her on her mobile number but she had not received his call and is silent about any text message having been sent by the accused on her mobile number on that day. Learned Advocate for the accused submitted that the prosecution has failed to prove the said CDRs as they have not identified the alleged calls and messages exchanged between the said mobile numbers during the said period. Next it has been argued that the father of the complainant/PW­4 has in his cross­ examination stated that he had not made any complaint to the police prior to the year 2013 and that he was not aware as to whether the accused had ever threatened the complainant to get her attacked with acid and stabbed with a knife, however, both the PW­1 and PW­2 in their testimony have stated that PW­4 had made a complaint against the accused in the P.S. It is argued that the complaint dated 11.03.2012, Mark A, is not a reliable document as it has no stamp of receipt of concerned P.S and the signatures of PW­4 thereon differ from the signatures of PW­4 in his testimony recorded and signed by him on 19.04.2017. Learned Advocate for the accused has submitted that CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 5/20 there no specific allegations have been proved by the prosecution to fall within the ambit of Section 509 of IPC and that the prosecution has failed to prove that the accused had threatened the complainant of getting her attacked with acid and stabbed with a knife. It is further submitted that the prosecution has not produced any evidence to prove Section 500 of IPC and since no calls or messages have been shown to have been exchanged between the mobile numbers of the complainant and the accused, Section 354­D of IPC cannot be stated to have been proved. It has been argued that the accused and the complainant had been in a relationship, however, due to some issues between them they had stopped communicating with each other and that the complainant has instead filed this false case against the accused. 5. Having perused the material and evidence placed on record during trial and arguments advanced on behalf of both the parties, the following legal point(s) emerge for determination: ­ a. Whether the accused with intention to insult the modesty of the complainant uttered words that the complainant was his girlfriend and that they had physical relations intending that such words be heard by her and intruded upon her privacy? b. Whether the accused made imputations regarding the complainant with intention to harm or reason to believe that such imputations will harm the reputation of the complainant? c. Whether the accused with intention to cause alarm threatened the complainant with injury to her and her family members, if she did not become his friend? and d. Whether the accused followed the complainant and contacted her or attempted to contact her to foster personal interaction with her repeatedly CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 6/20 despite a clear indication of disinterest by her? 6. In a nutshell the case of the prosecution is that the accused had been following the complainant since the year 2009 to compel her to have a personal relationship with him and when the complainant had showed no interest in communicating with him, the accused had continued to follow the complainant and had harassed her by sending her vulgar messages on her mobile number, threatening her to cause injury to her family members and to her by getting his friend to throw acid thrown on her and getting her stabbed with a knife and getting her and her brother kidnapped and by spreading rumours about the complainant in the neighbourhood to malign her reputation that the complainant was his girlfriend and that they had had a physical relationship. 7. What the complainant has stated is that the accused had started following her in the year 2009 when she was studying in Class X and that he had continued to do so over a period till the year 2013, and that after the incident of 13.06.2013, the complainant was compelled to make the complaint dated 14.06.2013 to the police. The said complaint dated 14.06.2013 is Exhibit PW­1/A which seems to encapsulate the ways in which the accused had been harassing the complainant during that time. It is based on this complaint that the FIR, Exhibit PW­10/A, was registered. The said complaint, Exhibit PW­1/A cannot be stated to be the encyclopedia of all the events, which had occurred during that span of almost 4 years, and the intent of the complaint was to set the criminal law into motion. In her statement recorded under Section 164 of CrPC, Exhibit PW­1/B, the complainant has stated that the accused had been harassing her and had been following her CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 7/20 since the time she was in Class X. She has stated that he used to follow her to her house, her school and to her tuition classes, and that he used to sit in front of her house despite the parents of the complainant asking him not to harass their daughter. The complainant has further stated that because of the accused her parents had sent her to the house of her maternal uncle and when she had returned to her own house, the accused had visited her house on Holi, after which a police complaint had been made against the accused. It is further stated that the accused continued to message her and on the night of 13.06.2013, the accused had given her four missed calls and had sent a text message that the complainant should be careful before making any complaint against him and had asked the mother of the complainant to get her daughter/complainant medically examined. The complainant has further stated that the accused used to tell his friends that he had had physical relations with the complainant and this way he used to malign her reputation and had told the complainant that he would get her abducted and after doing everything with her he would leave her and that the accused also used to block her way. The complainant in her said statement, Exhibit PW­ 1/B, does not seem to have disclosed any specific dates or other details of the incidents except that on the day of Holi, the accused had visited her house and that on 13.06.2013 she had received four missed calls and the said text message from the accused. It is pertinent to note here that there are no such text messages on record shown to have been received on the mobile phone number of the complainant from mobile phone number of the accused. The complainant has in the said statement, Exhibit PW­1/B, disclosed one additional/new fact that the accused had threatened her that he would get her abducted and after doing everything with her, he would leave her. The allegations made by the complainant in her said statement, Exhibit CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 8/20 PW­1/B, cannot be stated to be sufficiently detailed or suffixed with any specific time/date/month or year and no consistency or contradiction can be drawn between the said statement and her complaint, Exhibit PW­1/A. 8. Coming to the testimony of the complainant recorded before the Court on 26.04.2016, where she has stated that in the year 2009 when she was studying in Class X, the accused used to follow her and pass 'normal' comments at her, which the complainant used to avoid/ignore. That when the complainant was in Class XI in the year 2010, the accused had continued to follow her and had even followed her to her tuition classes near her house and had requested the complainant that he wanted to talk to her and that he liked her and that he wanted to become her friend. The complainant has further stated that when she was in Class XII in the year 2011, again the accused had started following her to her school and to her tuition classes and that one day the accused had told her that if the complainant did not accede to his request of friendship, he would die and that why the complainant had a problem with the accused, to which the complainant had replied telling him that it would not affect her even if he died today. Further the complainant has stated that the accused had continued to follow her and after she had completed her Class XII examination, the accused somehow came to know the mobile phone number of the complainant and had started texting the complainant songs of Hindi movies and messages confessing his love for the complainant. The complainant has stated that on one day the accused had called her and told her that he was aware that the complainant goes to the Saket Metro Station and that he would get acid thrown on her and get her stabbed by a knife through his friend and that the complainant would not be able to do anything about it. It has been alleged that the CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 9/20 accused had continued to call and send messages to the complainant. The complainant has further stated that she used to change her mobile numbers often because of the accused, therefore, she was unable to recall any of her mobile numbers and disclose them during recording of her testimony. The complainant has further stated that the accused used to tell all his friends that the complainant was his girlfriend and even a friend of the father of the complainant had told the mother of the complainant that the accused had been telling everybody that the complainant was his girlfriend. The complainant has stated that her father had made a written complaint in the year 2012 to P.S Saket, Mark C­1, however no action had been taken against the accused. The complainant has also alleged that whenever the accused used to cross her path, he used to tell her that he was aware in which class and school the brother of the complainant was studying and that if the accused wanted he could get the brother of the complainant kidnapped upon hearing which the complainant was terrified and had told her mother about it. The complainant has further stated that she had not told her father about these comments because she was scared that her father may stop her from pursuing her studies. Lastly, the complainant has mentioned the incident of 13.06.2013 on which date she states that she had received a call from the mobile phone number of the accused, however, she had not received the call and she had started crying and the mother of the complainant had called the accused on his mobile phone number on which the accused had told the mother of the complainant that if she wanted to make a complaint, she could do so, but that she should get her daughter medically examined. CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 10/20 9. The mother of the complainant/PW­2 has in her testimony stated that the accused had been harassing her daughter for over a long period of time and used to follow the complainant to her school and to her tuition classes and that the complainant herself had told PW­2 as to how the accused used to harass her. Further PW­2 has stated that one of their neighbours had informed her that the accused had told him that the accused was going to marry the complainant. Further PW­2 has stated that the accused used to threaten her daughter of causing harm to her if her daughter did not become friends with the accused and that to which the complainant had showed her disinterest stating that it did not affect her and that the accused could do whatever he wants. PW­2 has stated further that the accused knew the whereabouts of his daughter and that he could have harmed her in any way. It is further stated that PW­2 had made a complaint in the year 2012 against the accused on which the accused had kept silent for a few months but had again started threatening and harassing the complainant. PW­2 has further stated that the accused used to tell the classmates of the complainant that he would get the complainant abducted. Further, PW­2 has stated that the accused used to send vulgar messages to the complainant and on one occasion he had come to the house of the complainant in a drunk condition and used foul language and after ringing the doorbell of the house had sat over there. Lastly, PW­2 has stated that one day in the year 2013 during the examination time of the complainant, she had found the complainant crying because of the phone call of the accused and then she had called on the mobile phone number of the accused and the accused had told her that she should get the complainant medically examined. 10.The father of the complainant/PW­4 has deposed that in the year 2013 the CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 11/20 accused had called on the mobile phone number of his daughter and that on the day of Holi, the accused had come to their house on which PW­4 had tried to explain and make the accused understand, however, the accused had threatened the complainant to kill her. The brother of the complainant/PW­5 has deposed that when he was studying in Class VIII or IX, the accused used to come on his bike and take rounds of the place, where PW­5 used to play and that one day while PW­5 was walking with his friend, the accused forcibly asked PW­5 about the whereabouts of the complainant and why the complainant had not been getting out of the house for the past few days. PW­5 has also given one incident, where he and the complainant were in the market, and there the accused had come and made a comment at the complainant. Other than the family members of the complainant, a friend of the complainant has also given her testimony as PW­3 and has stated that they used to study together in the same tuition classes, where the accused used to follow the complainant and used to comment at her and send her text messages. 11.The first issue to be considered is whether the accused had followed, contacted or attempted to contact the complainant to foster personal interaction with her repeatedly despite a clear indication of disinterest by the complainant. The complainant has stated that the accused had been following her since the year 2009 and that after the incident of 13.06.2013, she had made the complaint to the police station. It is her own case that in the year 2009 the accused used to follow her and pass 'normal' comments at her, which she had avoided/ignored, meaning thereby that she had not reacted in any manner to the alleged conduct of the accused. Next the complainant alleges that in the year 2010 the accused had followed her to CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 12/20 her school and to her tuition classes, which was near her house, and that the accused had asked the complainant to talk to him for a few minutes and he had told her that he wanted to become her friend. The complainant has not further disclosed any facts of the year 2010, which would indicate that she had in any manner shown her disinterest in the accused. Next it has been alleged that the accused had continued to follow the complainant even in the year 2011 and the accused had once told her that if she did not speak to him then he would die and had questioned the complainant as to why she had a problem with the accused, to which the complainant for the first time had objected and told the accused that she did not care, if the accused died and that it would not affect her, which showed a clear indication of disinterest on the part of the complainant in the accused. What appears is that eventually only in the year 2011 the complainant had made it clear to the accused that she had no interest in him. Next it has been alleged that in the year 2012 somehow the accused got to know the mobile phone number of the complainant after which the accused had started sending the complainant songs of Hindi movies and messages with text of 'I love you' and had even called the complainant threatening her that he would get his friend to throw acid on the complainant and get her stabbed with a knife and that the complainant would not be able to do anything. After the complainant for the first time had objected to the incessant behaviour of the accused of wanting to become her friend, the accused had, thereafter, started calling and messaging the complainant on her mobile phone number. As per the complainant, the accused had somehow got to know the mobile phone number of the complainant in the year 2012 and during her cross­ examination, the complainant has stated that she had disclosed to the I.O. her mobile phone number on which she had received text messages and calls CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 13/20 from the accused. The complainant was unable to disclose her said mobile phone number(s) during her cross­examination stating that since the accused had been harassing her, she had had to change her mobile phone number several times and because of which she could not recollect any of her mobile phone numbers. The complainant has not given specific details of any other incident of the year 2012 except that the accused used to send her text messages and called her on her mobile phone number and threatened her. There seem to be no such facts disclosed by the complainant that in the year 2012, the accused had either met her or followed her to any place or commented at her in the presence of any of her family members or friends etc. To prove that despite the clear indication of disinterest shown by the complainant, the accused had repeatedly followed and contacted or attempted to contact the complainant to foster personal interaction with her, the prosecution in this case should have produced the CDRs of the mobile phone numbers of both the accused and the complainant of the year 2012, however, the I.O. has only collected the CDR of the months May and June 2013 without making any enquiry whatsoever regarding the alleged threat calls or text messages made/sent by the accused from his mobile phone number to that of the complainant in the year 2012. There is no record of any of the alleged text messages sent by the accused to the mobile phone number of the complainant. PW­2, PW­3, PW­4 and PW­5 have also not given any specific instances of the year 2012, which could corroborate the version of the complainant. PW­3 has stated that when she and the complainant used to go for their tuition classes, the accused used to follow the complainant and comment at her and he used to also send the complainant vulgar messages. The year in which PW­3 and the complainant used to go together for their tuition classes has not been specified. Further CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 14/20 PW­3 in her cross­examination has stated that she did not know what comments had been made by the accused at the complainant and that she had not seen any of the alleged vulgar messages which had been sent by the accused on the mobile phone number of the complainant. Even the brother of the complainant/PW­5, who has stated in his testimony that one day he and the complainant were going to the market where the accused had commented at the complainant, has not specified the year of the said incident. More importantly, the complainant has not deposed regarding any of those incidents, which have been stated to have occurred in the presence of PW­3 and PW­5. As per the testimony of PW­2, it is the complainant who had told PW­2 that the accused had been harassing her. The accused had not followed/commented/threatened etc., the complainant in the presence of PW­2. PW­4 has only vaguely specified the incident of Holi and has also not mentioned the year of the incident. 12.Then of the year 2013, the complainant has given details of only one isolated incident of 13.06.2013 on which date she claims that she had received a missed call from the accused because of which she had started crying and that the mother of the complainant had then called back on the mobile phone number of the accused. The accused has stated that he had by mistake dialed the mobile phone number of the complainant on that day. It is not disputed that the mobile phone number 7xxxxxxxx99 of Aircel was being used by the accused and the mobile phone number 8xxxxxxxx99 of Vodafone was being used by the complainant. As per the CDR of 7xxxxxxxx99, Exhibit PW­8/B, on 13.06.2013, there was first an outgoing message sent from 7xxxxxxxx99 to 8xxxxxxxx99 at 23:17:52 hours, then CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 15/20 incoming message was received on 7xxxxxxxx99 from 8xxxxxxxx99 at 23:17:57 hours, then an incoming call was received on 7xxxxxxxx99 from 8xxxxxxxx99 at 23:49:15 hours of duration of 102 seconds, then an outgoing call was made from 7xxxxxxxx99 to 8xxxxxxxx99 at 23:51:24 hours of duration of 22 seconds, then outgoing message was sent from 7xxxxxxxx99 to 8xxxxxxxx99 at 23:57:14 hours and lastly an incoming message was received on 7xxxxxxxx99 from 8xxxxxxxx99 at 23:57:19 hours. There have been exchange of messages and calls back and forth from both sides during the short span of around 30 minutes. There were no missed calls from 7xxxxxxxx99 to 8xxxxxxxx99. As correctly pointed out, the prosecution has failed to corroborate the testimony of PW­1 and PW­2 with the CDRs of both the mobile phone numbers to show that on 13.06.2013 one missed call (or even) four missed calls were made from the mobile phone number of the accused to the mobile phone number of the complainant and there was only single call back made by mother of the complainant to the mobile phone of the accused. A message was first sent by the accused to the complainant but immediately thereafter there was a response/reply sent by the complainant to the accused. What transpired in those messages exchanged has not been proved by the prosecution. Both the complainant and the accused have not disclosed all the facts of the incident of 13.06.2013. There is no chain of events proved by the prosecution even culminating into the incident of 13.06.2013. Due to the said apparent discrepancy in the CDR and the oral testimony of PW­1 and PW­2, it cannot be stated that the accused had been calling the complainant and contacting her to foster personal interactions with her. After the complainant had for the first time expressed her disinterest in the accused to him in the year 2011, the prosecution has failed to prove that, thereafter, the accused had CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 16/20 followed and contacted or attempted to contact the complainant repeatedly to foster personal interaction with her. Therefore, it is stated that the ingredients of Section 354­D of IPC have not been proved. 13.The next issue to be considered is whether the accused had said that the complainant was his girlfriend and that he had had physical relations with her and spent a night with the complainant with the intention to insult the modesty of the complainant and intending that such words were heard by the complainant and that it had intruded upon her privacy. The complainant has stated that she had come to know from her friends/classmates and the neighbours that the accused had been spreading rumours that the complainant was his girlfriend and they had had physical relations and that the accused was going to marry the complainant. Those friends/classmates/neighbours have not been cited as witnesses by the prosecution and without them being examined, it cannot be shown as to whether the accused had with the intention to insult the modesty of the complainant uttered these words to his/her friends/classmates and the neighbours intending that these words would be communicated to the complainant. Only the mother of the complainant/PW­2 has stated that the accused had told her on 13.06.2013 that she should get the complainant medically examined. As already stated above, the prosecution has not only failed to prove any interface between the accused and the complainant from 2011 till 13.06.2013 but also the alleged incident of 13.06.2013. There is no record of any messages on record to show that the accused may have sent any such vulgar message to the complainant. Further, no such incident has been proved, where the accused had personally met the complainant and uttered these words to her. CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 17/20 14.The next issue to be considered arises from the same facts that whether the accused had made imputations regarding the character of the complainant with the intention to malign her reputation that the complainant was his girlfriend and they had had physical relations. The explanation 4 of Section 499 of IPC clearly explains that an imputation would be stated to harm a person's reputation, if it directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person etc. The prosecution has not shown that the alleged imputation made by the accused had, in the estimation of all persons known to the complainant and her family, lowered the moral character of the complainant. The prosecution has failed to examine any independent witnesses, who could vouch for having heard or having been told about these imputations either from the accused or any other person of the same locality or known to the complainant and her family. 15.It is, therefore, stated that the ingredients of Section 500 and 509 of IPC have also not been proved. The last issue to be considered is whether the accused had threatened the complainant to cause injury to her person/ reputation and to her family members, if she did not become his friend. The specific allegation made by the complainant is that the accused had called her in the year 2012 and threatened her that he was aware she used to go to the Saket Metro Station and that he would get his friend to throw acid on the complainant and get her stabbed her with a knife. As already discussed above, the prosecution has failed to show that there were any calls or messages sent by the accused from his mobile phone number to that of the complainant in the year 2012. Further it is alleged by the complainant that CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 18/20 the accused in person had threatened the complainant, while passing by her that he was aware as to where and in which class the brother of the complainant was studying and that he would get her brother abducted. The complainant has stated that she had informed her mother about this incident, however, she had not told her father about it because she feared that her father may stop her studies. All these threats are of very serious nature and it is unbelievable that the complainant and her mother had not taken any steps to initiate any immediate action against the accused. The mother of the complainant has stated that she had met the mother of the accused and the mother of the accused had told her to get the accused and the complainant married. The mother of the complainant has further stated that after that the father of the complainant had made a complaint in the P.S in the year 2012. During the cross­examination, the mother of the complainant has stated that the said complaint had been made by her. This complaint is Mark C­1, which does not bear the stamp of receipt of the concerned P.S. and the father of the complainant/PW­4 in his cross­examination has denied having previously made any complaint to the P.S against the accused in the year 2012. The said complaint, Mark C­1 does not appear to be a reliable document. Further PW­4 has stated in his cross­examination that he had known the accused and his family for several years and that the accused had never misbehaved with him personally. It is unlikely that the father of the complainant/PW­4 despite being aware that the accused had allegedly threatened the complainant to kill her would not have taken any steps to confront even the parents of the accused in this regard, whom he had known for several years. This creates a doubt on the veracity of these serious allegations made against the accused. CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 19/20 16.Considering all the above findings, the Court is of the view that the prosecution has failed to stand on its own legs and discharge the burden on them to prove their case beyond all reasonable doubt. It would be fruitless exercise now to deal in length the defence of the accused. Even otherwise, the accused has himself not stepped into the witness box to prove his case. The friend of the accused/DW­1 has stated that he, the complainant, the accused and a friend of the complainant had gone together to Gurudwara Bangla Saheb, however, no suggestion was put to the complainant regarding such a meeting in her cross­examination by the Learned Advocate for the accused. DW­1 has been unable to prove that the complainant and the accused were friends or had any relationship whatsoever. 17.Accordingly, the accused is acquitted of offence under Section 509, 506, 354­D and 500 of IPC . Pronounced in Open Court today July 30, 2018 (SALONI SINGH) Metropolitan Magistrate­02, Digitally Mahila Court, Saket, South, signed by New Delhi, 30.07.2018 SALONI SALONI SINGH SINGH Date: 2018.08.02 16:29:56 +0530 CrCNo. 2033206/2016 State v. Anshul Rawat Page No. 20/20