State vs 1. Bhura on 4 May, 2019 IN THE COURT OF Dr. SATINDER KUMAR GAUTAM : ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE-03 : EAST DISTRICT : KARKARDOOMA COURTS : DELHI. S.C. No.: 1350/2018 State Versus 1. Bhura S/o Late Sh. Inamulla R/o H. No.662, Jheel Khureja, Delhi. 2. Mohit @ Rudra S/o Sh. Kaptan Singh R/o H. No.226, Gali No. 4, 5th Floor Pushta Sonia Vihar, Delhi. 3. Rashid @ Shakir S/o Sh. Islamuddin R/o Tolli Mohalla, Loni Ghaziabad, UP. FIR No. : 102/2018 Under Section : 392/397/411/120-B/34 IPC & 25 Arms Act Police Station : Geeta Colony Chargesheet Filed On : 28.06.2018 Chargesheet Allocated On : 23.07.2018 Judgment Reserved On : 04.05.2019 (F.N.) Judgment Announced On : 04.05.2019 (A.N.) FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 1 of 22 JUDGMENT 1. Succinctly, prosecution case are that on receipt of DD No. 20-A dated 25.03.2018 while ASI Pramod Kumar along with Const. Sandeep reached at the spot i.e. 6/125, Geeta Colony, Sh. Richpal Singh, complainant met him and got recorded his statement inter alia alleging therein that on that date at about 7.45 p.m. while he along with Manpreet Singh was present at 6/25, Geeta Colony, on two wheeler scooter bearing registration no. DL-6SAX-6785, he was got stopped by three persons who came there on one Pular bike of black colour and at the point of gun, he was robbed of scooty, mobile phone and bag containing cash and documents. Those culprits also robbed the mobile phone of Manpreet Singh. On the basis of said statement of complainant made to the police, present case bearing FIR No. 102/2018 Under Sections 392 / 397 / 34 IPC and 27/27 Arms Act PS Geeta Colony was registered. 2. It is further case of the prosecution that despite all efforts, no clue of any culprit was found and that on 01.04.2018 on receipt of intimation vide DD no. 38-B accused Rashid @ Shabir and Rudra @ Mohit were formally arrested in this case and later on, on the basis of disclosure statement, accused Bhura was also arrested in the present FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 2 of 22 matter. Accused persons Rashid @Shakir and Mohit refused to join the judicial test identification parade proceedings. Despite best efforts accused Amit could not be arrested. Recoveries were also effected from the accused persons. On conclusion of formal proceedings, chargesheet was filed against these three accused persons namey Bhura, Rashid and Mohit for their trial, for the offence punishable under Sec. 392 / 397 / 411 / 324 IPC and also 25/27 Arms Act . 3. After compliance of the provisions of Section 207 CrPC by the court of Ld. MM, chargesheet was committed to the Court of Sessions as the offence under Se. 397 IPC is exclusively triable by it. 4. Vide order dated 06.10.2018 charge under Section 120-B read with Sec. 392 IPC was framed against all these three accused persons; vide said order separate charge under Sec. 392/397 read with Se. 120-B IPC was framed against accused persons Mohit @ Rudra and Rashid @ Shakir and further vide said order, charges under Sec. 411 IPC was framed against each of these accused separately. To the said charges, all these accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 5. In order to prove the guilt against the accused persons, prosecution took help of nine witnesses, out of them - Richpal Singh FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 3 of 22 (PW-01) - complainant and Manpreet Singh (PW-02) are material witnesses of the case as offence or robbery in question was committed upon them. PW-3 Const. Rohit and PW-4 ASI Karan Singh are witnesses to the arrest of accused personsMohit @ Rudra and Rashid @ Shakir in case FIR No. 229/2018 PS New Usmanpur. PW-5 ASI Pramod Kumar is Investigating Officer of the case who recorded the statement of complainant, put endorsement and got the case registered. He also arrested all three accused persons in the present and is a witness to recovery effected from the accused and proved the memos prepared to that aspect. PW-6 HC Sachin Nagar and PW-9 Const. Adesh Kumar joined the investigation of this case with ASI Pramod Kumar on 09.04.2018 and are witnesses to the arrest of accused persons Rashid and Mohit. PW-7 HC Kapil joined the investigation of this case with ASI Pramod Kumar on 01.04.2018 and is a witness to the arrest of accused Bhura and recovery from him. FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 4 of 22 PW-8 Const. Sandeep joined the investigation of this case with ASI Pramod Kumar on 25.03.2018 and got the FIR of this case registered on ruqqa being handed over to him. During prosecution evidence, all these three accused persons in their statement recorded under Sec. 294 CrPC admitted statement of Smt. Preeti Kaur; DD No.20-A as Ex.C1 and record of case FIRs No. 229/2018 & 102.2018 and also CDR of mobile phone no. 9891519630 as Ex.C2. Detailed testimonies of the witnesses concerned shall be discussed at the relevant stage of judgment. 6. After conclusion of the prosecution evidence, the statement of the accused persons was recorded under Section 313 CrPC in which all of them denied all the incriminating circumstances put against them. All these accused persons pleaded their innocence further pleading their false implication in the present matter after lifting them from their respective houses. None of them opted to lead evidence in their defence. FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 5 of 22 7. Ld. Addl. PP for the State argued that prosecution has been able to prove the charge against all these accused persons and that recovery from the accused persons remained undisputed further submitting that there is no reason for false implication of any of these accused persons at the hands of the either victims or police officials as no ill-will, grudge or enmity has either been alleged or proved on record. Ld. Addl. PP thus, prayed for conviction, against the accused persons, as per charges framed against them. 8. Ld. defence counsel argued that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its case against any of these accused persons as neither of the material witnesses i.e. both the victims failed to identify any of these accused persons as responsible for the crime committed in the present matter. It is also submitted that there is no evidence either by oral or documentary to attract the provisions of Sec. 120-B IPC. Ld. defence counsel further contended that qua offence punishable under Sec. 411 IPC, complainant and victim failed to identify the robbed items and police officials failed to join any independent witness at the time of the alleged recovery and besides the above, there are material contradictions and improvements in their statements and this creates FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 6 of 22 doubt on the prosecution story to that aspect and benefit of the same must be given to the accused persons and thus, prayed for acquittal of the accused persons in the present matter. 9. Having considered the rival submissions and record has also been perused with law on the issues in question. 10. Admittedly in the present matter, star and key witnesses of the case qua offences punishable under Se. 392/397 IPC are Richpal Singh (PW-01) and Manrpeet Singh (PW-2) - victims. Record reveals that these witnesses narrated the incident but failed to identify any of these accused persons being responsible for the crime of robbery committed upon the victims or responsible for the crime in question. Both these witnesses were declared hostile by State but despite that both of them stuck to the stand taken them him during their examination-in-chief stating that they are unable to identify any of these accused persons as responsible for the crime in question. Both these witnesses denied the suggestion put to them by ld. Addl. PP for the State that they are deposing falsely due to the fear of the accused persons or in order to save them from the present matter. FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 7 of 22 11. To facilitate the matter, testimony of PW-1 Richpal which was deposed on 16.01.2019 before the court is as under: "On 25.03.2018, I along with Manrpeet, my colleague, left for Jheel on my activa number DL-6SAX- 6785 and at about 7.45 p.m. when we reached near park 6 Block Geeta Colony, three boys came near to me on one bike and pointed out a gun on me after getting stopped my scooty. They all snatched my mobile, cash amount of Rs. 20,000/- with some documents and scooty and also of mobile of Manpreet. After commission of crime, they all left the spot towards Geeta Colony on their bike and of my scooty. I made call at 100 number after procuring a phone from a passerby. Police came there and I made statement Ex.PW1/A bearing my signatures at point A. I also shown the place of incident to police on which site plan was prepared. CCTV footage was also checked and no clue of culprits was found. All culprits were wearing helmets and muffled their faces and also it was dark, as such, I am unable to identify any one of them. Besides the above, I was scared so much at the time of incident being sugar patient. Even today, I am unable to identify any of the FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 8 of 22 culprit. At this stage, ld. Addl. PP wants to cross- examine the witness on the ground that he is resiling from his earlier statement. Heard. Allowed. XXX By Sh. A.K. Mishra, ld. Addl. PP for the State Attention of the witness is drawn towards the accused persons present in court by ld. Addl. PP to which witness submits that he is unable to identify any of them being any of the offender being responsible for the crime in question. It is wrong to suggest that I am not intentionally not identifying any of the assailant as being won over by them or due to their fear. It is wrong to suggest that I am deposing falsely to this effect." 12. Testimony of Manpreet Singh (PW-2) before the court as as follows: "On 25.03.2018, I along with Richpal, my colleague, left for Jheel on his activa bearing registration number DL-6SAX-6785 and at about 7.45/7.50 p.m. when we reached near park 6 Block Geeta Colony, three boys came near to our vehicle on one pulsar bike Black Colour. Those three boys got stopped our vehicle. I was pillion rider of the said vehicle. Gun was pointed out at me by middle pillion rider. Richhapl was also gun pointed by culprits. Those boys also robbed my mobile phone FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 9 of 22 make Oppo and cash amount of Rs. 200-250/-. All those culprits also robbed mobile, cash amount of Rs. 15-20,000/- with some documents and scooty of Richpal. After commission of crime, the culprit who had put gun on my head drove the scooty of Richpal and then all left the spot towards Geeta Colony on their bike. I could not note down the number of bike of culprits as I became hopeless. Call at 100 number was made by Richpal Singh, after procuring a phone from a passerby. Police came there and I narrated the incident to the police. Later on, I came to know the fact that robbed amount was around 5 to 6 lacs. The boy who had robbed me was not wearing any helmet but he has covered his face with a cloth. Later on, I realised that gun which was pointed on me was a desi katta. I am unable to identify any of the culprits who committed crime with us. Even though I cannot identify the persons present in the court being culprits as they were wearing helmet and covered their faces. At this stage, ld. Addl. PP wants to cross- examine the witness on the ground that he is resiling from his earlier statement. Heard. Allowed. XXX By Sh. A.K. Mishra, ld. Addl. PP for the State Attention of the witness is drawn towards the FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 10 of 22 accused persons present in court by ld. Addl. PP to which witness submits that he is unable to identify any of them being any of the offender being responsible for the crime in question. It is wrong to suggest that I am not intentionally not identifying any of the assailant as being won over by them or due to their fear. It is wrong to suggest that I am deposing falsely to this effect." 13. Hence, it is revealed from the statements of both these witnesses mentioned above that they failed to identify any of these accused persons and as such, nothing has come on record to the effect that it was any of these accused persons who are responsible for the crime of robbery committed upon either of these victims despite being declared hostile and cross-examined by ld. Addl. PP for the State. 14. Perusal of the record is clear to the aspect that these three accused persons have also been charged for the offence punishable under Sec. 120-B IPC read with Sec. 392 IPC. 15. Having regard to the criminal conspiracy, it is to be seen that earlier to the introduction of Sec. 120-B IPC, conspiracy per se was not an offence. Criminal conspiracy is an independent offence. It is punishable separately. There may be an element of abetment in a FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 11 of 22 conspiracy, but conspiracy is something more than abetment. To establish a charge of criminal conspiracy, the prosecution must prove an agreement between two or more persons to do or cause to be done some illegal act or some act which is not illegal by illegal means provided that where the agreement is other than or to commit an offence, the prosecution must go further and prove that some act besides the agreement was done by one or more of the parties in pursuance of it. 16. Criminal conspiracy has been defined under Sec. 120A IPC. Under Sec. 120A IPC offence of criminal conspiracy is committed when two or more persons agree to do or cause to be done an illegal act or legal act by illegal means, when it is a legal act by illegal means over act is necessary. Offence of criminal conspiracy is an exception to the general law where intent alone does not constitute crime. It is intention to commit crime and joining hands with persons having the same intention. Not only the intention but there has to be agreement to carry out the object of the intention, which is an offence. The question for consideration in a case is that all the accused have the intention and did they agree that the crime be committed. It would not be enough for the offence of conspiracy when some of the accused merely entertained a FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 12 of 22 wish, howsoever, horrendous it may be, that offence be committed. 17. Act subsequent to the achieving of the object of conspiracy may tend to prove that a particular accused was party to the conspiracy. Once the object of conspiracy has been achieved, any subsequent act which may be unlawful, would not make the accused part of conspiracy like giving shelter to an absconder. 18. Each conspirator can be attributed to each other's action for conspiracy. Under Sec. 10 of Indian Evidence Act conspiracy is punishable independent of its fruitation. The principle of agency as a rule of liability and not rule of evidence has been accepted both by the Privy Council and Hon'ble Apex Court in Nalini's Case (1999) 5 SCC 253 in which it is explained that joined and every said written and done for common purpose is deemed to have by each one of them. 19. The agreement is gist of the offence. In order to constitute a single general conspiracy there must be a common design in furtherance of common design. Each appropriator plays its separate part in its integrated and unitedly to achieve common purpose. Each one is aware that he has part to play in general conspiracy though he may not at all, it secret or by mean by which common purpose is to be accomplice. The evil scheme may be promoted by some or some may FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 13 of 22 dropped or some may joined at later stage, but the conspirator continued until it is broken. The conspiracy may develop in success stage. There may be general plan to accomplice the common design by such means as from time to time may found expedient. 20. The ingredients of criminal conspiracy as laid down in case of R. Ventakrishnanav Vs. CBI (2009) 11 SCC 737 are: (i) an agreement between two or more persons; (ii) the agreement must relate to doing or causing to be done either - (a) an illegal act (b) an act which is not illegal but itself but done by illegal means. 21. In a case where conspiracy is alleged, court must enquire for what they have come together to pursuant to the unlawful object. The former does not render conspirator but the later does for the offence of conspiracy some kind of physical manifestation of agreement is required to be established. The evidence as to the transmission of through sharing the unlawful acts is not sufficient to conspiracy. Conspiracy is continuing offence till it is executed or reascended or frustrated by choice of necessity. During its substantiate whenever anyone of the conspirator he would be held guilty under Sec. 120B IPC. FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 14 of 22 22. In case of State of H.P. Vs. Krishan Lal Pradhan (1987) 2 SCC 17 it was held that the offence of conspiracy is consisted of meeting of mind of two or more persons for doing an illegal act or an act by illegal means for performance of act. Therefore pursuance to the criminal conspiracy conspirator to do many act, and all of them are liable if any one committed any part at any point of time. 23. Perusal of the record of this case is crystal clear that no witness has ever been cited or produced or examined on behalf of the prosecution to the effect that he or she has ever heard them about hatching criminal conspiracy to commit any offence. Besides the above, there is no iota of evidence, either oral or documents or electronic device which show that at any point of time these accused persons have ever conspired to commit any offence. From the perusal of the record, it is amply clear that there is nothing on record which may whisper to the effect that any criminal conspiracy was ever hatched to commit the offence as alleged. There is no evidence regarding Call Details Record of any of the accused persons or prior meeting of the accused persons at any point of time before committing the offence, there is no recovery of mobile phone etc. or any other circumstance, oral or documentary FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 15 of 22 evidence to prove that accused persons ever hatched any criminal conspiracy to commit any such offence ever being produced on record by the prosecution. In order to prove the criminal conspiracy which is punishable under Section 120B IPC, there must be direct or circumstantial evidence to show that there was prior agreement between two or more persons to commit an offence. In Parliament attack case, the accused had never contacted the deceased terrorist on place but had helped one of conspirators to flee a safer place after incident was not held guilty as conspirator, as observed in the case titled as State NCT of Delhi Vs. Navjot Sandhu , [2005 (Crl.J. 3950 (SC)]. 24. From the material on record as brought by the prosecution in order to prove Section 120-B IPC, the prosecution has the mobile numbers of the deceased and her family members even though, they can lay their hands to locate the mobile locations and its call details or any oral or written agreement of meeting of mind of accused persons prior to their apprehension but no CDR or call location chart etc. has been procured by the investigating agency so as to lay hands upon the accused persons for hatching any criminal conspiracy against the accused persons. On this account, the prosecution case falls flat. FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 16 of 22 25. Prosecution has failed to produce any evidence by oral or document way to show that offence was committed pursuant to criminal conspiracy hatched by them at any point of time. 26. Hence, in view of the above, court is of the view that prosecution has miserably failed to prove its case against any of these accused persons beyond all reasonable doubts for the offences for which these accused persons have been charged with for the offences punishable under Sec. 120-B IPC read with Sec. 392 IPC and also 392/397 read with 120-B IPC . 27. As such, with these observations, all these accused persons namely Bhura; Mohit @ Rudra and Rashid @ Shakir are acquitted of the offence punishable under Sec. 120B IPC read with Sec. 392 and also 392/397 read with Sec. 120-B IPC 28. Apart from that accused persons have also been charged for the offence punishable under Sec. 411 IPC separately as allegedly they have got recovered the items. 29. To prove the said offenes, prosecution took help of PW-5 ASI Pramod Kumarand PW-7 HC Kapil. As clear from the record, none of these accused claim over the case property at point of time. Both FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 17 of 22 these police witnesses in clear and unequivocal terms stated that accused persons got recovered the articles which were seized. 30. Contention of the ld. defence counsel to the aspect that non identification of alleged recovered item is fatal to the prosecution case is not tenable in the eyes of law in view of the circumstances of the case. As per the case of the prosecution, cash amount, mobile phone and scooter was recovered from the accused persons. 31. Qua contention of the ld. counsels for the accused persons that no public witness was joined during those alleged proceedings, court is of the view that it is well settled that the police officials are competent witnesses and conviction against the accused can be based on their sole testimony but an onerous duty has been cast upon the court to scutrtinise their statements very closely in order to form an opinion whether they are reliable and trustworthy. 32. In judgment reported as Gurcharan Singh @ Channi & Another Vs. State (1993 (2) RCR (Criminal) 696 the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi held as under: "There is no dispute with the said proposition of law that the statements of the police witnesses are entitled to the same weight and the same consideration which is FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 18 of 22 attached to the statement of a member of the public. However the impugned statement must inspire confidence to be relied upon in a particular case." 33. Contention of the ld. defence counsel that pubic witnesses have not been joined at the time of the alleged recovery is also of no value in the eyes of law. In case reported as Bahadur Singh & Ors Vs State,2013 IV AD (Delhi) 506, Hon'ble Court observed as: Para 14: As regards non association of the public witnesses at the time of the recovery, nothing has been shown that the evidence of police witnesses is unreliable and not trustworthy. There is no reason why they should falsely implicate the Appellants. As held in Karamjit Singh Vs State (Delhi Admn .) 2003 III AD (SC) 353 the presumption that a person acts honestly applies as much in favour of a police personnel as of other persons and it is not a proper judicial approach to distrust and suspect them without good grounds. There is no principle of law that without corroboration by independent witnesses their testimony can not be relied upon. In Ajmer Singh V. State of Haryana [(2010) 3 Supreme Court Cases 746] the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows: "We can not forget that it may not be possible to find independent witness at all places, at FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 19 of 22 all times. The obligation to take public witnesses is not absolute. If after making efforts which the court considered in the circumstances of the case reasonable, the police officer is not able to get public witnesses to associate with the raid or arrest of the culprit, the arrest and the recovery made would not be necessarily vitiated. The Court will have to appreciate the relevant evidence and will have to determine whether the evidence of the police officer was believable after taking due care and caution in evaluating their evidence.". 34. Qua contention of ld. counsel that there are contradictions and improvements in the statements of police officials, it is to be seen that Hon'ble Apex Court has laid down in catena of judgments that only major contradictions and discrepancies need be considered. Minor discrepancies are to be ignored. First of all, it is to be mentioned here that ld. counsels unable to pin point any contradictions what to major or minor and it seems that this argument was only for the sake of arguments. Apart from that it case reported as ( 2011) 6 SCC 279 A. Shankar v. State of Karnataka Hon'ble Apex Court observed as follows: "In all criminal cases, normal discrepancies are bound to occur in the depositions of witnesses FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 20 of 22 due to normal errors of observation, namely, errors of memory due to lapse of time or due to mental disposition such as shock and horror at the time of occurrence. Where the omissions amount to a contradiction, creating a serious doubt about the truthfulness of the witness and other witnesses also make material improvement while deposing in the court, such evidence cannot be safe to rely upon. However, minor contradictions, inconsistencies, embellishments or improvements on trivial matters which do not affect the core of the prosecution case, should not be made a ground on which the evidence can be rejected in its entirety." 35. No reason for false implication at the hands of the police officials is brought on record. No ill-will, grudge or enmity has either been alleged or proved against the accused. Apart from that scooter which was being used by victims on the date and time of incident was recovered from one of the accused. There cannot be no dispute about registration number of the scooter. Said scooter was taken on superdari by Richpal. Statement of Smt. Preeti Kaur regarding her ownership of mobile phone has also been admitted by accused persons. As mentioned above, none of these accused claimed over case property FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 21 of 22 and there is no reason for their false implication as no ill-will, grudge or enmity has either been alleged or proved. 36. Hence, in view of these over all circumstances, it is clear that prosecution has proved its case against these accused persons to the effect that they have found in possession of the items, knowing and having reasons to believe the same to be stolen property. Accordingly, accused persons namely Bhura; Mohit @ Rudra and Rashid @ Shakir are held guilty for the offence punishable under Sec. 411 IPC separately for individual recovery from them and are convicted accordingly. 37. Sum up of the above discussion is that accused persons namely namely Bhura; Mohit @ Rudra and Rashid @ Shakir are acquitted of the offences punishable under Sec. 120-B read with Sec. 392 IPC and also 392/397 IPC . However, these accused persons are held guilty for the offence punishable under Section Digitally signed 411 IPC separately. SATINDER by SATINDER KUMAR KUMAR GAUTAM Announced in the open Court GAUTAM Date: 2019.05.04 on 04th day of May, 2019 16:36:01 +0530 (Dr. Satinder Kumar Gautam) Additional Sessions Judge-03 (East) : Karkardooma Courts : Delhi. FIR No. 102/2018 PS Geeta Colony State Vs. Bhura etc. Page No.: 22 of 22