Shishir Chand vs Jai Anant Dehadrai on 5 February, 2024 IN THE COURT OF SH NAVJEET BUDHIRAJA ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE-02, SOUTH DISTRICT, SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION NO. 302/2023 CNR NO. DLST01-007698-2023 IN THE MATTER OF Shishir Chand D 50C, 1st Floor Chhatarpur Encalve New Delhi-110074 ........ Revisionist Versus 1. Jai Anant Dehadrai R/o C-44, Third Floor Neeti Bagh, New Delhi-110049 2. Govt of NCT of Delhi 7th Level, A Wing Delhi Secretariat Complex I P Estate New Delhi-110002 ........ Respondents DATE OF INSTITUTION : 09.08.2023 DATE OF RESERVING JUDGMNT : 04.01.2024 DATE OF PRONOUNCEMENT : 05.02.2024 JUDGMNET Vide this Order, I shall dispose of the present revision petition filed under section 397(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short ' Cr.P.C ) seeking setting aside of summoning order 29.05.2023 passed by Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate-06 (in short 'Ld. MM') in criminal complaint case No. 39/2023 titled Jai Dehadrai Vs. Shishir Chand. Pg No. 1 of 21 2. The present revision petition has been predicated on the following submissions:  The complainant Sh. Jai Anant Dehadrai (herein after referred to as respondent no.1) was previously engaged by the revisionist as an Advocate in various matters but the complaint fails to specify even a single defamatory statement made by the revisionist on any public forum/platform nor in the form of direct allegations in the two complaints filed by the revisionist against the respondent before District Consumer Forum, Qutub Institutional Area, New Delhi and BCD.  Ld MM without appreciating the facts and circumstances of the case has issued summon under section 204(1)(a) of Cr.P.C, 1973 to the revisionist vide order dated 29.05.2023 and the same was received by the revisionist on 03.07.2023 after summer vacation and the said impugned order passed by Ld. MM is wholly misconceived, is contrary to law and passed without application of judicious mind.  The revisionist is a former Army Cadet of the prestigious National Defence Academy, a gold medalist, a post graduate in economics, working pro bono full time since 2013 as Delhi Coordinator of a healthcare NGO, PBT India having helped hundreds of victims of medical malpractice and corruption in healthcare.  The criminal complaint dated 05.01.2023 of the respondent no.1 is totally false, malicious, misleading and dishonest case filed with an oblique motive to harass and intimidate his former Pg No. 2 of 21 client for seeking accountability for acts of grave professional misconduct by the said respondent no.1.  The respondent no.1 has filed the criminal complaint with dirty hands, malafide intent and oblique motive to pressure and intimidate the revisionist for having instituted two civil proceedings against the respondent for grave professional misconduct that prejudiced three cases of the revisionist against powerful and influential persons.  The respondent no.1 has willfully and intentionally given a criminal texture to a purely civil dispute between the two parties arising out of professional misconduct of the respondent no.1 in withdrawing from three cases of the revisionist within 24 to 48 hours between 29.08.2019 and 31.098.2017 viz a writ petition, a civil suit and a transfer petition (criminal) without sufficient reason or notice and the same is in direct contravention and violation of code of ethics laid down by Bar Council of India (in short 'BCD') to regular conduct of Advocates.  A consumer case bearing no.242/2019 is pending at District Consumer Forum, Qutub Institutional Area, New Delhi since September 2019 wherein four successive notices were issued by the consumer court to the respondent no.1 herein vide order dated 11.02.2020, 12.10.2021, 05.04.2022 and 12.09.2022 passed to file his evidence. However, the respondent no.1 is yet to file his evidence.  A civil revision petition no.76/2022 of the revisionist filed before BCD on 22.12.2022 against the order dated Pg No. 3 of 21 01.10.2022 wherein BCD without even properly hearing the revisionist by disallowing him to lead evidence by mis interpreting the facts dismissed the revisionist's complaint of gross professional misconduct against the respondent no.1 on the ground that professional incompetence cannot be a ground for taking action.  The appeal of the revisionist pending before BCI contains direct, cogent and credible evidences of the respondent's grave conflict of interest with Tata Group in general and Mr. Ratan Tata in particular i.e. the parties against whom the petitioner was fighting a legal battle where the complainant was appearing as an advocate with disclosing the conflict of interest.  Respondent no.1 has suppressed and concealed a material fact that he had approached the revisionist twice last year in August and December 2022 respectively at NCDRC, INA, New Delhi and thereafter at District Consumer Forum for out of court settlement, however, at that point of time, the revisionist had not shown any interest. The revisionist has reasons to believe that the failure of conciliation in 2022 motivated the respondent no.1 to initiate criminal proceedings against the revisionist by filing this criminal complaint purely out of malice and ill will and compel the revisionist to settle the dispute under pressure.  Furthermore, such a disclosure was indispensable on consideration of the fact that the revisionist had shared with the respondent sufficient prima facie material and evidences to indicate that the accused doctor holds a fake MBBS degree and Pg No. 4 of 21 was appointed to Tata Steel in November 2005 when Mr. Ratan Tata was the chairman of Tata sons. On the contrary, the respondent no.1 readily agreed to file three courts cases on behalf of the revisionist.  The respondent no.1 had malafidely concealed and suppressed from the revisionist that in his fourth year in law school in Pune, he had not only interned with a subsidiary of Tata Motors but also developed a personal rapport and enduring relationship with Mr. Ratan Tata. Mr. Ratan Tata had invited the respondent no.1 for an hour long interaction in his corner office at Bombay house, the headquarters of Tata sons. In 2014, when the respondent no.1 had started practicing law, Mr. Ratan Tata wrote the foreword of a book that is claimed to be written by the respondent no.1.  The respondent no.1 by not disclosing to the revisionist his conflict of interest with both the organization (Tata Sons) and its Chairman (Mr. Ratan Tata) while taking up three crucial briefs on behalf of the Revisionist had acted in direct breach of Rule 4 of Bar Council of India ' Code of Ethics ' for Advocates.  The respondent no.1 under Para 2 of his statement dated 24.03.2023 recorded under section 200 Cr.P.C has made a false submission that the revisionist discharged the services of the respondent no. 1 just after notices were issued to all four respondents named in the Writ Petition of the revisionist. The true facts are that the services of the respondent no.1 were never discharged by the revisionist. Pg No. 5 of 21  That, on 04.08.2017, a crucial day of hearing, neither the respondent no.1 nor anyone from his office entered their appearance on behalf of the revisionist. The revisionist was present in the courtroom to observe the proceedings. Thereupon, the revisionist received a call from the respondent no.1 at 2.30 PM that he is stuck up with some important work at Supreme Court and the revisionist should take an adjournment. However, the revisionist instead of taking an adjournment went ahead and argued his own case in so far as MBBS degree of the fake doctor/impersonator is concerned.  The revisionist even managed to get a favorable interim Order from the Hon'ble Single Judge who directed the accused to produce 'all' original certificates to ascertain his medical qualification on the next date of hearing.  On returning home on 04.08.2017, the revisionist expressed his displeasure with the respondent no.1 for his absence on such a crucial day of hearing. Thereafter on 29.08.2017, one day before argument on qualification of the accused, the revisionist had a meeting with the respondent no.1 at his office to decide the course of action the following date i.e. 30.08.2017. During the meeting, the revisionist simply requested the respondent no.1 that since he had advanced part argument on the degree of the accused, he would like to conclude the same the next day by appearing as Petitioner-in-Person and then the respondent no.1 can take over the case. However, the respondent no.1 was not inclined to allow the revisionist to further argue the Pg No. 6 of 21 matter and a consensus could not be reached.  The respondent no.1 was too keen to wrest back the control of the case. On returning home in the evening of 29.08.2017, the revisionist was surprised to receive an email at 8.14 PM from the office of the respondent no.1 stating that his office is withdrawing as legal counsel in the matter filed before Delhi High Court with immediate effect.  The respondent no.1 has relied on half-truth in his complaint to impress upon this Court that the revisionist appeared as Petitioner-in-Person on 30.08.2017 in his Writ Petition to conclude argument on the MBBS degree of the fake doctor wherein he suffered an adverse Order. The true and complete facts are that on 30.08.2017, the four respondents including Ranchi University acting in conspiracy played fraud on Delhi High Court by filing forged and fabricated copy of MBBS degree directly in the courtroom without an affidavit. Furthermore, in defiance of previous Order of High Court directing the accused to produce all original documents to ascertain his medical degree, no document pertaining to his MBBS admission was filed by the accused.  The very next day i.e. 31.08.2017, the revisionist received a second email from the office of the respondent no.1 informing him that he is withdrawing from all matters of the revisionist viz his civil suit and criminal transfer petition.  The respondent no.1 has perfunctorily mentioned in the criminal complaint the fact that the revisionist has also filed an Pg No. 7 of 21 Intervention Application dated 01.12.2022 before the Supreme Court of India in a pending SLP without elucidating on the contents of the Intervention Application and perusal of the same, the intent of the revisionist is expressly and pellucidly clear that the revisionist intends to bring Advocates under the purview of Consumer Protection Act and regulate their practice as opposed to allegation of defamation alleged by the respondent no.1 therein.  In para 9 of the complaint, the respondent no.1 has malafidely taken undue and unfair advantage of a typological error inadvertently made by the revisionist in his complaint filed with BCD in order to frame the revisionist in a false and a vexatious case with respect to events that took place on 29.08.2017.  The typological error by the revisionist wherein the year 2017 has been erroneously typed as 2020 under Para 20 of the complaint of the revisionist filed before BCD and wherein the error is obvious on reading the very next paragraph of the same complaint i.e. Para no.21, wherein the same year has been correctly typed as 2017. 2. In response to the revision petition on behalf of respondent no.1, he has mainly spoken on the lines of the evidence led by him before Ld. MM, which I shall embark upon in my ensuing discussion. 3. Ld. Counsel for the respondent No.1 in his brief Pg No. 8 of 21 synopsis referred to the following judgments:- ( i) Gujarat vs. Afroz Mohammed Hasanfatta , (2019) 20 SCC 539; ( ii) Shatrughna Prasad Sinha vs. Rajbhau Surajmal Rathi , (1996) 6 SCC 263; ( iii) Fiona Shrikhande vs. State of Maharashtra , (2013) 14 SCC 44; (iv) Nagawwa vs.V.S. Konjalgi, (1976) 3 SCC 736; ( v) Ram Chandra Singh vs. Savitri Devi , (2003) 8 SCC 319; (vi) Chaman Lal vs. State of Punjab, (1970) 1 SCC 590; ( vii) Sewakram Sobhani vs. R.K. Karanjia , (1981) 3 SCC 208; (viii) Sanjay Mishra vs. GNCTD & Anr., 2012 SCC OnLine Del 1779; (ix) M.C. Verghese vs. T.J. Poonam, (1969) 1 SCC 3; ( x) Maroti vs. Ramkrushna , 2021 SCC OnLine Bom 2184; ( xi) Madhuri Mukund Chitnis vs. Mukund Martand Chitnis , 1990 SCC OnLine Bom 410; (xii) Prabhakaran vs. Gangadharan, 2006 SCC OnLine Ker 302; ( xiii) Thangavelu Chettiar vs. Ponnammal , 1965 SCC OnLine Mad 248. 4. Rejoinder to the reply also came to be filed on behalf of the revisionist. Ld. counsel for revisionist also made reference to the judgments of the Supreme Court in Anjana Saikia (Das) Vs. Anuradha Das and Another , (2003) 2 Gauhati Law Reports 565 and Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande and Ors Vs. Uttam and Ors, MANU/SC/0093/1999 and Pg No. 9 of 21 also submitted short written synopsis. 5. Ld counsel for the revisionist Sh. Samyak Gangwal and Ld counsel for the respondent no. 1 Sh. Sidharth Arora argued their respective submissions made in the revision petition as well as reply and re-joinder thereto as well as brief written synopsis. 6. Before I embark upon the grounds raised in the present revision petition as well as the respective submissions of Ld counsels from the both the sides, I would want to recapitulate the events unfolded before the Ld. MM which culminated into the summoning of the revisionist against which the present revision petition has been preferred. 7. On poring over the complaint as well as deposition of the respondent no. 1 as CW-1, it is revealed that respondent no. 1 has been a practicing lawyer since 2011 and around the year 2016 revisionist approached him to draft and appear in a writ petition before the High Court of Delhi in a matter concerning the alleged negligence in his brother's medical treatment in a hospital in Jamshedpur and being a client, respondent no. 1 assisted him in drafting and appearing in the Writ petition no. 277/2017 titled as 'Shishir Chand Vs Medical Council of India and Ors '. Respondent no. 1 appeared as a counsel for the revisionist on multiple occasions before the High Court of Delhi and on 23.01.2017, the High Court was pleased to issue notice to Pg No. 10 of 21 the respondents in the said Writ petition. Thereafter, on 04.08.2017, revisionist himself appeared in the matter as the respondent no. 1 was stated to be held up in some other matter, therefore, the revisionist met respondent no. 1 at his office on 29.08.2017 and apprised him of his intention to appear on the following date by himself. Upon hearing this, respondent no. 1 informed the revisionist that he would no longer be able to represent him in his matter and apropos this, an e-mail through the office of respondent no. 1 discharging him from the matter was also sent to the revisionist on 29.08.2017 and again on 31.08.2017. Pursuant to this, revisionist appeared on his own in his matter and eventually his matter was dismissed on 05.09.2017. 8. The complaint and deposition of respondent no. 1/ CW1 further reveals that the revisionist filed a false, malicious and deeply defamatory complaint dated 18.04.2022 against respondent no. 1 alleging professional misconduct before the BCD, which came to be dismissed vide order dated 01.10.2022 after hearing the revisionist. Revisionist also filed a complaint before District Consumer Forum bearing no. CC 242/2019 falsely alleging professional misconduct. Revisionist also filed one reply dated 08.12.2022 in the District Consumer Forum wherein he appended the copy of the intervention application that had been filed by him before the Supreme Court of India containing similar false, malicious and deeply defamatory Pg No. 11 of 21 remarks and allegations against respondent no. 1. 9. Respondent no. 1 further alleged that the above complaints were received at his office e-mail address which was accessible to his junior colleagues who have also seen the defamatory contents of the allegations leveled against him and due to the said defamatory remarks, his reputation has suffered adversely causing loss to his reputation, goodwill in the eyes of his colleagues, professional peers, client and public at large. 10. Revisionist, on the other hand, has not expostulated that respondent no. 1 was previously engaged by the revisionist as an advocate in various matters, however, as per the revisionist, on 04.08.2014, which was the crucial day of hearing before the High Court of Delhi, neither the respondent no.1 nor anyone from his office entered appearance on behalf of revisionist while the revisionist was present in the court room to observe the proceedings. The revisionist then received a call from respondent no. 1 at 02:30 PM wherein the revisionist was informed that respondent no. 1 was stuck up with some important work at the Supreme Court of India and revisionist should take an adjournment. However, the revisionist instead of taking an adjournment went ahead and argued his own case of the alleged fake Doctor/impersonator and managed to get a favorable interim order from the Hon'ble Single Judge who directed the respondent therein to produce all original certificates to ascertain his medical qualifications on the next date of hearing which was fixed for Pg No. 12 of 21 30.08.2017. Thereafter, on returning home on 04.08.2017, the revisionist expressed his displeasure with respondent no. 1 for his absence on such an crucial day of hearing. 11. Thereafter, on 29.08.2017, one day before arguments on qualification of the respondent therein, the revisionist had a meeting with respondent no. 1 at his office to decide the course of action and during the said meeting, the revisionist requested the respondent no. 1 that since he had advanced part arguments on the degree of the respondent therein, he would like to conclude the same the next day by appearing as petitioner in person and then the respondent no. 1 can take over the case. However, the respondent no. 1 was not inclined to allow the revisionist to further argue the matter and a consensus could not be reached. Revisionist further alleged that respondent no. 1 was too keen to wrest back the control of the case. 12. On returning home in the evening of 29.08.2017, the revisionist was surprised to receive an e-mail at 08:14 PM from the office of the respondent no. 1 stating that his office is withdrawing as legal counsel in the matter before the High Court of Delhi with immediate effect. In the meanwhile on 31.08.2017, the revisionist received the second e-mail from the office of respondent no. 1 informing him that he was withdrawing from the matters of the revisionist i.e. his Civil Suit and Criminal Transfer Petition. Pg No. 13 of 21 13. It is one of the assiduous arguments on behalf of the revisionist that the act of sudden withdrawal of respondent no. 1 was in transgression of Rule 2 of Bar council of India which enunciates "An advocate should not ordinarily withdraw from serving a client once he has agreed to serve them. He could withdraw only if he has a sufficient cause and by giving reasonable and sufficient notice to the client ". 14. On this premise, revisionist has postulated that the act of withdrawal from the writ petition amounted to professional misconduct on the part of the respondent no. 1 as revisionist was not granted sufficient time to engage a new counsel, and this act of respondent no. 1 has made him suffer the dismissal of the Writ petition before the High Court of Delhi on 05.09.2017. 15. In this back drop, revisionist has further alleged that he has preferred a complaint to the lawful authority which is the BCD against respondent no. 1 and, thus, he is protected under the umbrella of exception 8th and exception 9th of section 499 IPC. For the sake of reference, these exceptions are reproduced as under:- "Eight Exception- Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person- it is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation." "Ninth Exception- Imputation Pg No. 14 of 21 made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's interests- It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or for any other person, or for the public good". 16. Before building further of this, let me also reproduce the contents of an e-mail dated 29.08.2017 sent from the office of respondent no. 1 and admitted to have been received by the revisionist as under :- " This is to inform you that we are withdrawing as your legal counsels from your matter filed before the High Court of Delhi. We are happy to return your case brief, kindly collect the same at the earliest from our office. Warm Regards, Shivangini". 17. It is irrefragable from above that the revisionist himself had implored the respondent No.1 to let him appear in the writ petition before the High Court of Delhi on his own on 30.08.2017 and, thus, he cannot be heard complaining against respondent no.1 that he withdrew from the case at eleventh hour. It is also an admitted position that the revisionist had a comprehensive meeting with respondent No.1 apropos this issue and it is only after the meeting that respondent No.1 had conveyed through his office withdrawing from the brief as well Pg No. 15 of 21 as the writ petition. This request of the revisionist to appear on his own perhaps was driven by obtainment of some favorable order on the previous date i.e. 04.08.2017 when respondent No.1 had expressed his inability to appear before the Court and asked the revisionist to seek adjournment but the revisionist went on to make personal appearance and managed to obtain a favorable relief in the form of direction to the respondent therein to furnish proof of MBBS Degree. The fact that after the entreatment of the revisionist to appear in person before the High Court of Delhi in the given writ petition had culminated in respondent No.1, his counsel, withdrawing from the case may not tantamount to any professional misconduct as after considering the said request of the revisionist, it was the prerogative of respondent No.1 to take a call whether to appear for the revisionist who had taken upon himself to be on the wheels rather than taking the back seat after having availed the services of respondent No.1 being his counsel. Rule 2 of the Bar Council of India comes with a rider that an advocate can withdraw from the case if he has a sufficient cause and by giving reasonable and sufficient notice to the client. In the obtained factual matrix of the case, I am of the view that the intimation to the revisionist through e-mail on 29.08.2017 by respondent No.1 was a reasonable and sufficient notice to the revisionist to withdraw from the case and for a sufficient cause and, therefore, the revisionist cannot take the shelter under the Rule 2 of Bar Council of India for the act of lodging of a formal complaint before BCD against respondent No.1. Pg No. 16 of 21 18. Another circumstance which is worthwhile to note here is that the revisionist suffered the adverse order on 05.09.2017 which is being attributed to the unprofessional attitude of respondent No.1, however, revisionist made the complaint in BCD only on 18.04.2022 i.e. almost 4 ½ years later. Revisionist has not tendered any explanation for such delay much less any plausible and tenable explanation. Though none of the sides has spoken about any specific time period prescribed for filing of such complaint as per the relevant rules/ provisions, however, the delay of 4 ½ years in raking up the issue of unprofessional conduct on the part of respondent No.1 by the revisionist apparently smacks of bad faith and, therefore, on this ground as well, the revisionist cannot resort to Exception 8 and Exception 9 of Section 499 IPC that the accusation against the respondent No.1 was preferred in good faith. 19. The other limb of the argument on behalf of the revisionist is that there was a non-disclosure of conflict of interest of respondent No.1 with Tata Group and Mr. Ratan Tata, which fact was malafidely concealed and suppressed from the revisionist that in his 4th year in law school in Pune, respondent No.1 had not only interacted with the subsidiary of Tata Motors but also developed a personal rapport and during relationship with Mr. Ratan Tata who had later on invited the respondent No.1 for an hour long interaction in his corner office at Bombay House. Further, in 2014 when the respondent No.1 had started Pg No. 17 of 21 practicing law, Mr. Ratan Tata wrote a forward letter of the book that is claimed to be written by the respondent No.1. Ld. Counsel for revisionist argued that by not disclosing this conflict of interest, respondent No.1 has acted in breach of Rule 4 of Bar Council of India. This argument also, in my opinion, is misconceived as it is not in dispute that while respondent No.1 was appearing for the revisionist against the respondent therein, notice was issued to the opposite side in the said writ petition. If respondent No.1 had any bias towards Tata Group, he could have presented the case before the High Court of Delhi in the writ petition in such a manner which may not culminate in issuance of the notice to the other party. Moreover, respondent No.1 had decided to withdraw his services to the revisionist only when the revisionist had spoken his mind to him to appear in the writ petition before the High Court of Delhi on his own. As already noticed above, the said act of respondent No.1 withdrawing from the case may not fall within the domain of being unprofessional or unethical. Therefore, this argument on behalf of the revisionist also deserves to be shot down. 20. Ld. Counsel for the revisionist has referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Rajindra Kumar vs. Sitaram Pandey vs. Uttam & Ors., decided on 11.02.1999 and Anjana Saikia Dass vs. Anuradha Dass & Anr. of Guwahati High Court (2003) 2 Guwahati Law Reports 565, Paragraph 12, however, both the judgments are fact centric and not applicable Pg No. 18 of 21 to the facts of the present case. 21. Ld. counsel for revisionist also stressed upon the fact that criminal proceeding cannot be commenced in a mechanical manner and Ld. MM is bound to apply his mind as is the mandate of the Supreme Court of India in Pepsi Foods Ltd and Ors Vs. Special Judicial Magistrate , MANU/SC/1090/199 and Mehmood Ul Rehman Vs. Khazir Mohammad Tunda, MANU/SC/0374/2015 . There is no cavil to the principle mentioned in these two judgments, however, in the present context, judgment of the Supreme Court in M/s IVECO Magirus Brandschutztechnik GMBH Vs. Nirmal Kishore Bhartiya and Another , 2023 LiveLaw (SC) 860 can be referred to by mentioning paragraph 47 which is as under: "47. Based on our understanding of the law and the reasoning that we have adopted, issue of process under section 204 read with section 200, Cr. PC does not ipso facto stand vitiated for non- consideration of the Exceptions to section 499 , IPC unless, of course, before the High Court it is convincingly demonstrated that even on the basis of the complaint and the materials that the Magistrate had before him and without there being anything more, the facts alleged do not prima facie make out the offence of defamation and that consequently, the proceedings need to be closed." Pg No. 19 of 21 22. In the instant case, as already noted above, since prima facie case is made out for the offence of defamation, Ld. MM has rightly summoned the revisionist and criminal proceeding cannot be held to have been commenced in a mechanical manner. 23. Ld. counsels from both the sides also alluded to some further correspondences between the parties, however, those are not relevant for the present revision petition which is only to the extent of assessing the correctness of the impugned order whereby the revisionist was summoned to face inquiry and trial for the offence of defamation and, thus, deliberation on those is not warranted. 24. In so far as the contention of the revisionist that even though the complaint stood dismissed by BCD, proceedings before the Bar Council of India and the Consumer Forum are currently pending in which notice has been issued to respondent No.1, it is observed that from the over all gamut of circumstances above and the fact that admittedly complaint of the revisionist against the respondent No.1 containing the defamatory remarks has already been dismissed from one forum i.e. BCD, prima facie indicates that the complaint was not made in good faith and the pendency of the proceedings before Bar Council of India would not be a hindrance in respondent No.1 availing his remedies u/s 499 / 500 IPC for defamation before the appropriate forum and, Pg No. 20 of 21 therefore, this argument also does not hold any water. 25. Before parting with the order, I could not help but notice the propensity of the revisionist to malign and bring disrepute to the Indian Judiciary and the Judges which is evident from some of the comments made by him as reflected in some of the annexures found in the trial court record. The complaint made by the revisionist before the BCD Mark A against respondent no.1 appears to reflect the same mind set of the revisionist. Even though, the proceedings undertaken by the revisionist before the Consumer Forum and the copy of Intervention Application filed therein may be considered in the realm of him availing his legal remedies but the complaint to BCD employing the words 'unprofessionalism', 'lack of commitment', 'casual and non chalant manner' 'arbitrarily withdrawal of services' prima facie in the absence of good faith would amount to publication among the judicial fraternity making it actionable. 26. In the aforesaid backdrop, I do not find any reason to interfere with the finding of the Ld. MM in the impugned order dated 29.05.2023 and, thus, the revision petition is found to be without merit and is accordingly dismissed. File be consigned to record room. Announced in the open Court (Navjeet Budhiraja) on 05.02.2024 ASJ-02/South District Saket / New Delhi 05.02.2024 Pg No. 21 of 21