Tata Sons Limited vs Sri C.M.Ibrahim on 15 September, 2018 IN THE COURT OF LXXXI ADDL. CITY CIVIL AND SESSIONS JUDGE, BENGALURU (CCH82) Dated: This the 15th of September, 2018 Spl. CC No. 225 of 2018 -: Present :- Sri B.V.PATIL, B.Com., LLB., (Spl) LXXXI ACC & SJ, Bengaluru City (CCH-82) (Special Court exclusively to deal with criminal cases related to elected MPs/MLAs in the State of Karnataka) Complainant :- Tata Sons Limited A public limited company having Its registered office at Bombay House, 24, Homi Mody Street Mumbai-400 001 Represented by Sri V.Hemchandar (Sri C.H.Hanumantharaya, Advocate for complainant) V/s Accused:- Sri C.M.Ibrahim Major, R/at: #81, Benson Cross Road Off Nandidurg Road Benson Town Bengaluru-560 046 (Sri M.S.N., Advocate for accused) 2 Spl.CC No.225/2018 JUDGMENT A private complaint in PCR No.5832/2004 was filed before VIII ACMM, Bengaluru by the complainant company M/s.Tata Sons Limited, having its registered office at Mumbai, represented by one V. Hemchandar against the accused Sri C.M.Ibrahim, former Civil Aviation Minister, in the Union Cabinet, alleging that the accused has committed offences punishable U/s.499 and 500 of IPC . 2. After recording the sworn statement of complainant, learned Magistrate ordered for registering the case against the accused for the above said offences. Summons was issued to accused. In response to the summons, accused appeared before the learned Magistrate. Plea was recorded, the evidence of the complainant and one witness was recorded, complainant side was closed. The matter was posted for arguments. 3. In view of the notification issued by the Government of Karnataka bearing No.LAW 10 LCE 2018 dt.8.2.2018 and letter No.RSB 288/2017 dt.26.2.2018 of Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka, after establishing special court i.e., LXXXI Addl. City Civil and Sessions Judge Court, Bengaluru, exclusively to deal with criminal 3 Spl.CC No.225/2018 cases related to elected MPs/MLAs in the State of Karnataka, as accused in the case was elected MLC, the case was transferred to this Court. On receiving the records, the case was re-numbered as Spl.CC No.225/2018. On service of Court notice, both complainant and accused appeared before this Court through their Advocates. 4. The brief facts of the case of the complainant are that: "The complainant is a public limited company, having its registered office at Mumbai. One V.Hemchandar was authorised by the company to file the complaint. Accused is the prominent politician, who is the former Civil Aviation Minister in the Union Cabinet. The complainant is the principal investment holding company of the Tata Group of companies and proprietor of the trademark TATA, which was duly registered. The complainant is one of the oldest premier public limited company in the country which enjoys a clean reputation both in India and abroad. This reputation has been built by its consistent ethical conduct over many decades in connection with the business activities of the company. The complainant is well known in the entire world for its professionalism and code of conduct. On 25.3.2004 a news appeared in the news paper 'the Times of India' with a headline "Tatas tried bribe me - Ex- 4 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Minister". This report appeared in page No.7 of the news paper, a headline carrying the news item made by the accused, making a false allegation that the complainant and R.V.Deshpande, the former Large and Medium Industries Minister, Government of Karnataka, attempted to bribe the accused to grab 2200 acres of land under the guise of Bengaluru International Airport project. The complainant was shocked to note that another report was appeared in the news paper 'Asian Age, Bengaluru' dt.25.3.2004 with a headline 'Ibrahim accuses Deshpande'. The news item appeared in page No.13 and 14 of the edition, wherein it is reported that in a press conference, the accused made accusations that money had been offered to him to clear the State Governments' proposal to hand over the land to the complainant on a permanent basis for Devanahalli International Airport Project. On plain reading of the reports appeared in both news papers clearly suggest that a palpable false statement was made by the accused to malign the reputation of the complainant company, the imputations made by the accused against the complainant harmed its reputation. Neither the complainant nor R.V.Deshpande conspired to allot the permanent ownership of 2200 acres of land to 5 Spl.CC No.225/2018 the complainant company for establishing an International Air Port at Bengaluru. The Complainant Company and R.V.Deshpande, never attempted to bribe the accused in respect of allotment of said land. The complainant is a company with high ethical standards, never indulged in such mal practices. The accused made such statement through a press conference shows his intention to publicize and damage the reputation of the company. The false statement made by the accused resulted in lowering the moral and intellectual character of the complainant in estimation of its share holders and public at large. The statement made by the accused highly defamatory and calculated to damage the reputation and good-will of the Complainant Company. The statements made by the accused as published in the above said news papers are per se, defamatory. The accused in the press conference made such statements deliberately, dishonestly with malicious intention to cause harm and prejudice to the reputation, honour and credibility of the complainant, which is defamatory in nature. The malicious and false imputations were published through the above said news papers. The complainant company has always maintained very high ethical standards in their conduct and dealings. The scandalous 6 Spl.CC No.225/2018 imputations made by the accused with full knowledge of the consequences have tarnished the image of the complainant in the estimation of the public and caused great embarrassment. The imputations made by the accused have promoted to loose faith and trust of its share holders in the company, business, morality, conduct and dealings of the same. The loss of reputation, honour and credibility suffered by the company is in a greater magnitude, the consequences arising there from are irreversible. The defamatory statements made by the accused against the complainant company received vide spread coverage as the editions of Times of India and Asian Age news papers who have published the news item, had vide circulation in and around Bengaluru. The imputations against the complainant were also made by the accused in the presence of number of news paper reporters present in the press conference, who heard such imputations. On 25.3.2004 the complainant addressed a letter to the accused, seeking his confirmation in respect of the statement attributed to him which was reported in the above said news papers and called upon to tender unconditional written apology to be published with equal prominence in the said news papers. 7 Spl.CC No.225/2018 It is also notified to the accused that no satisfactory response is received on his side, the complainant will initiate appropriate legal proceedings with the assumption that accused has made such false and defamatory statements against the complainant. Similar letters were also addressed to resident Editor of both news papers calling upon them to publish retraction of the report, published against the complainant. In response to the letter addressed by the complainant, the news paper Times of India carried a report dealing with the contents of communication in its news paper dt.26.3.2004. The news paper Asian Age carried out a news item that the complainant refuted the allegations made by the accused in its news paper dt.27.3.2004. However, the accused neither tendered any unconditional written apology, nor got published the apology in the news paper before filing the complaint, even no written unconditional apology was sent to complainant in response to its letter dt.25.3.2004. The accused made false allegations and defamatory statements against the complainant with malafide intention to harm and malign the reputation of the complainant. The scandalous statements have been made by the accused to gain the publicity for himself. Thereby the accused has committed the offences 8 Spl.CC No.225/2018 punishable U/s. 499 and 500 of IPC , prayed for initiating action against the accused. 5. After taking cognizance of the offence, the learned Magistrate recorded sworn statement of the complainant. Thereafter, issued summons to accused. In response to the summons, accused appeared before the Court through his counsel. Plea was recorded and explained to accused, who denied the plea, claims to be tried. 6. In order to prove its case, the complainant was examined as PW1 and one witness as PW2, got marked ten documents as Ex.P.1 to 10 and closed his side. Statement of the accused under Sec.313 of Cr.P.C., was recorded. The defence of the accused is one of total denial. It was stated by the accused that he has not given any statement as alleged in this case. 7. I heard the arguments of the learned advocate for complainant and learned advocate for the accused. 8. The points that arise for the consideration of this Court are:- 9 Spl.CC No.225/2018 1. Whether the complainant proves that on 25.3.2004, in a press meet, accused made a malicious statement to the press reporter of Times of India with headline that "Tatas tried to bribe me: Ex-Minister" and the relevant portion is that "Speaking to the reporters here, Ibrahim said: When I was Civil Aviation Minister, Deshpande conspired with Tatas to get permanent ownership of 2,200 Acres of land. They also tried to bribe me to permit this." Further accused made a statement to the press reporter of news paper 'Asian Age', Bengaluru, that "Ibrahim accuses Deshpande", the revant portion of which is that "former Union Civil Aviation Minister C.M.Ibrahim on Wednesday threw a bombshell by claiming that Major and Medium Industries Minister R.V.Deshpande had offered him (Ibrahim) money to clear the State Government's proposal to give land to the Tatas on a permanent basis for the Devanahalli International Airport. Addressing a Press conference, Mr.Ibrahim alleged that Mr.Deshpande wanted to favour the Tatas by handing over 2200 acres of land permanently to them for construction of the International Airport at Devanahalli and sought the Center's clearance for the same. He (Deshpande) 10 Spl.CC No.225/2018 offered money to me, but I refused though we were in the same party". The accused by means of spoken words which were published in the news papers Times of India, and Asian Age respectively on 25.3.2004, the accused made such statements against the complainant knowingly well that those statements are untrue and with an intention to harm, or knowing that such a imputation would harm the reputation of complainant company in the public at large, defamed its reputation and thereby committed an offence punishable U/s.500 of IPC ? 2. What order? 9. My findings on the above points are as under; Point No.1:- In the Negative Point No.2:- As per the final order, for the following; REASONS 10. Point No.1: Before examining the evidence adduced by the prosecution it is quite necessary to refer the facts of the case as narrated in the complaint:- 11 Spl.CC No.225/2018 "The complainant is a public limited company, having its registered office at Mumbai. One V.Hemchandar was authorised by the company to file the complaint. Accused is the prominent politician, who is the former Civil Aviation Minister in the Union Cabinet. The complainant is the principal investment holding company of the Tata Group of companies and proprietor of the trademark TATA, which was duly registered. The complainant is one of the oldest premier public limited company in the country which enjoys a clean reputation both in India and abroad. This reputation has been built by its consistent ethical conduct over many decades in connection with the business activities of the company. The complainant is well known in the entire world for its professionalism and code of conduct. On 25.3.2004 a news appeared in the news paper 'the Times of India' with a headline "Tatas tried bribe me - Ex- Minister". This report appeared in page No.7 of the news paper, a headline carrying the news item made by the accused, making a false allegation that the complainant and R.V.Deshpande, the former Large and Medium Industries Minister, Government of Karnataka, attempted to bribe the accused to grab 2200 acres of land under the guise of Bengaluru International Airport project. 12 Spl.CC No.225/2018 The complainant was shocked to note that another report was appeared in the news paper 'Asian Age, Bengaluru' dt.25.3.2004 with a headline 'Ibrahim accuses Deshpande'. The news item appeared in page No.13 and 14 of the edition, wherein it is reported that in a press conference, the accused made accusations that money had been offered to him to clear the State Governments' proposal to hand over the land to the complainant on a permanent basis for Devanahalli International Airport Project. On plain reading of the reports appeared in both news papers clearly suggest that a palpable false statement was made by the accused to malign the reputation of the complainant company, the imputations made by the accused against the complainant harmed its reputation. Neither the complainant nor R.V.Deshpande conspired to allot the permanent ownership of 2200 acres of land to the complainant company for establishing an International Air Port at Bengaluru. The Complainant Company and R.V.Deshpande, never attempted to bribe the accused in respect of allotment of said land. The complainant is a company with high ethical standards, never indulged in such mal practices. The accused made such statement through a press conference shows his intention to publicize and 13 Spl.CC No.225/2018 damage the reputation of the company. The false statement made by the accused resulted in lowering the moral and intellectual character of the complainant in estimation of its share holders and public at large. The statement made by the accused highly defamatory and calculated to damage the reputation and good-will of the Complainant Company. The statements made by the accused as published in the above said news papers are per se, defamatory. The accused in the press conference made such statements deliberately, dishonestly with malicious intention to cause harm and prejudice to the reputation, honour and credibility of the complainant, which is defamatory in nature. The malicious and false imputations were published through the above said news papers. The complainant company has always maintained very high ethical standards in their conduct and dealings. The scandalous imputations made by the accused with full knowledge of the consequences have tarnished the image of the complainant in the estimation of the public and caused great embarrassment. The imputations made by the accused have promoted to loose faith and trust of its share holders in the company, business, morality, conduct and dealings of the same. The loss of reputation, honour and 14 Spl.CC No.225/2018 credibility suffered by the company is in a greater magnitude, the consequences arising there from are irreversible. The defamatory statements made by the accused against the complainant company received vide spread coverage as the editions of Times of India and Asian Age news papers who have published the news item, had vide circulation in and around Bengaluru. The imputations against the complainant were also made by the accused in the presence of number of news paper reporters present in the press conference, who heard such imputations. On 25.3.2004 the complainant addressed a letter to the accused, seeking his confirmation in respect of the statement attributed to him which was reported in the above said news papers and called upon to tender unconditional written apology to be published with equal prominence in the said news papers. It is also notified to the accused that no satisfactory response is received on his side, the complainant will initiate appropriate legal proceedings with the assumption that accused has made such false and defamatory statements against the complainant. Similar letters were also addressed to resident Editor of both news papers calling 15 Spl.CC No.225/2018 upon them to publish retraction of the report, published against the complainant. In response to the letter addressed by the complainant, the news paper Times of India carried a report dealing with the contents of communication in its news paper dt.26.3.2004. The news paper Asian Age carried out a news item that the complainant refuted the allegations made by the accused in its news paper dt.27.3.2004. However, the accused neither tendered any unconditional written apology, nor got published the apology in the news paper before filing the complaint, even no written unconditional apology was sent to complainant in response to its letter dt.25.3.2004. The accused made false allegations and defamatory statements against the complainant with malafide intention to harm and malign the reputation of the complainant. The scandalous statements have been made by the accused to gain the publicity for himself. Thereby the accused has committed the offences punishable U/s. 499 and 500 of IPC ." 11. In order to prove that the accused deliberately, dishonestly with a malicious intention to malign the reputation of the complainant, made false imputations against the complainant company in a press meet held on 24.3.2004 at Bengaluru. The 16 Spl.CC No.225/2018 imputations made by the accused, which are defamatory in nature, were published in Times of India and Asian Age news papers which are widely circulated in and around Bengaluru, complainant relied on the publications made in the above stated news papers. The relevant publications are marked at Ex.P.8(a) and Ex.P.9(a) respectively. The contents of publication reads as under:- Ex.P.8(a): "Tatas tried to bribe me: Ex-Minister. Times News Network Bengaluru: Former Civil Aviation Minister C.M.Ibrahim on Wednesday alleged that the Tatas and former large and medium industries minister R.V.Deshpande had attempted to bribe him to grab 2,200 Acres of land in the name of the International Airport project. Speaking to the reporters here, Ibrahim said: "When I was civil aviation minister, Deshpande conspired with the Tatas to get permanent ownership of 2,200 acres of land. They also tried to bribe me to permit this." Ibrahim said the government had insisted on the project being build-own-transfer. "But Deshpande 17 Spl.CC No.225/2018 suggested that it should be build-own-operate," he added. Ibrahim said despite the code of conduct, the Krishna government was taking decisions with financial implications. "All for monetary considerations." He claimed." Ex.P.9(a): Ibrahim accuses Deshpande. By our correspondent Bengaluru, March 23: Former Union civil aviation minister C.M.Ibrahim on Wednesday threw a bombshell by claiming that major and medium industries minister R.V.Deshpande had offered him (Ibrahim) money to clear the state government's proposal to give land to the Tatas on a permanent basis for the Devanahalli international airport. Addressing a press conference, Mr. Ibrahim alleged that Mr.Deshpande wanted to favour the Tatas by handing over 2,200 acres of land permanently to them for construction of the international airport at Devanahalli and sought the Center's clearance for the same. "He (Deshpande) offered money to me but I refused though we were in the same party," he added." 18 Spl.CC No.225/2018 12. In order to prove its case, the complainant examined the Power of attorney holder V.Hemchandar as PW1, who deposed before this Court that the Tata Sons Limited is the owner of trade mark "TATA", originally it was a partnership firm, later converted into a limited company which has maintained high ethical values in the trade and business as laid down by its founder Sri Jamshedji Tata who was the follower of 'speak the truth and follow the dharma'. The Tata Sons Limited promoted many companies under its flagship, each company is a leader in their own business. 13. It is further deposed that on 25.3.2004 he received many calls and enquiries from their business partners, friends, relatives, customers, contractors, including employees and public, expressing their anguish over the defamatory statement published in Times of India and Asian Age news papers. When, PW1 read the news item, he was shocked and missed his heart beat. The publications are derogatory and defamatory. The company recruits youngsters for various jobs, after imparting training and inductions programmes, they will work for the house of Tatas who used to contribute to the nation and to the industry. On reading such a publication, the employees started doubting the very integrity of the 19 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Tata company. Even the suppliers and contractors after reading the publications started talking that Tatas are not different from other companies. The publications published in the above said news papers on the press meet held by the accused irretrievably maligned the reputation of the House of Tatas and lowered its image in the eye of public. Such damage has been caused by the accused. 14. It is further evidence of PW1 that accused in the press meet, addressed the press persons and alleged that Sri R.V.Deshpande, the then Minister for Small and Large Industries, attempted to bribe him to favour the Tatas for acquisition and handing over of 2200 acres of land on permanent basis to establish Bengaluru International Airport at Devanahalli. Said statement of the accused is utter false, made with ulterior motive so as to make a political mileage, who was planning to contest in the forthcoming parliamentary elections. Government of Karnataka decided to establish an International Airport at Devanahalli, KSIIDC, was the nodal agency who floated global tender for the project. A consortium consisting of Tata Industries Ltd, RAYTHEON and Singapore Consortium, under the leadership of Tata Industries, issued a letter of intent to build a International Airport at Devanahalli on "Build, 20 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Own, Operate" basis (BOO). The KSIIDC appointed Chief Architect and two Senior Officers of the Airport Authority of India who access the requirement of the land and allied matters, the State Government decided to allot 3500 acres of land to be acquired and allotted to the consortium on a 99 years lease at an annual lease amount of Rs.2 lakhs per acre. The same was agreed between State Government, KSIIDC and Tata consortium. Accused was the then Minister for Civil Aviation in the Union Cabinet and also real estate agent, who was well aware of the provisions of Land Acquisition Act which is the subject matter of the State. Accused deliberately and dishonestly made derogatory statement in order to mislead the public and tarnish the image of the complainant. After the publication of the news in the news paper, when the company issued notice to the resident editors of the news papers, they published the contents of the views of complainant without apologizing or regretting in respect of the publication. 15. It is the further evidence of PW1 that he was serving in TATA sons Limited even prior to 25.3.2004. The power of attorney holder of complainant Hemchandar is no more. The representative of the Company Mr.Eric Vaz who was conducting this case, left the 21 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Tata Group, thereafter he was authorized by the complainant to depose by executing a power of attorney to conduct this case. 16. It is further deposed that after publication of the statements made by the accused, several persons enquired with the veracity of the statement through phone calls, direct interactions and also by way of e-mails. Even the employees of the Tata Group questioned about the statement of the accused published in the news paper, the imputations made by the accused which were published in the above said news papers are defamatory in nature, the same maligned the reputation of the complainant company. 17. PW2 Sowmyan Ramakrishnan deposed before this Court that he is working in Tata group since 42 years, he is an advisor to CEO and MD of Tata Power. It is deposed by him that he worked in various companies of Tata Group, who was in-charge of Bengaluru Airport Project. The Tata Group is a highly ethical group did lot of social activities, the same is professionally run. Government of Karnataka initiated a project for setting up of International Airport near Devanahalli in the year 1994, the project being a bigger one, he was appearing in the Media to make statement about the progress of the project. Himself, Mr.Chinnappa, 22 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Senior Manager, Mr.T.R.Subramanyan and other officers in the team visited KSIIDC for interaction about the project. 18. PW2 further deposed that their team of officers in connection with the establishment of international airport project met the then Industries Minister Mr.R.V.Deshpande. Accused was part of this project, he had seen the accused in Delhi with Karnataka Government officials, who was the then Civil Aviation Minister in the Union Cabinet. In order to get approval they met the accused along with officers of KSIIDC at Delhi. During the validity period of MoU of Tata consortium, there are no chances of clearance of the project, Tata consortium lost the interest and suspended the project. 19. It is the further deposed by PW2 that he has read the publication of the news in the news papers, marked at Ex.P.5(a), Ex.P.8(a) and Ex.P.9(a), the contents of the publications are not true. The statements of accused published in the news papers created doubts in respect of the credibility of Tata Group in the minds of readers. He received number of calls from people known to him, employees, partners and business associates in respect to the defamatory statement made by the accused maligning the reputation 23 Spl.CC No.225/2018 of the complainant which lowered the dignity of Tata group in the eye of public. 20. The offence of defamation embodied in Sec.499 of IPC consist of three essential ingredients, namely, a) making or publishing any imputation concerning any person b) such a imputation must have been made by words either spoken or intended to be read or by signs or by visible representation and , c) the said imputation must have been made with intention to harm or with knowledge or having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerned. The definition makes it amply clear that the accused must either intend to harm the reputation of a particular person or reasonably know that his/her conduct would cause such harm. Explanation 2 to Sec.499 further states that it may amount to defamation to make any imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. 24 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Therefore, the intention to cause harm is the most essential 'sine qua non' of an offence under Sec.499 of IPC. 21. In respect of criminal cases, it is an accepted principle of criminal jurisprudence that the burden is always on the prosecution/complainant and never shifts. This version from the cardinal principle that the accused is presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty by the prosecution/complainant and the accused is entitled to the benefit of every reasonable doubt. 22. At the outset, I would like to state that when the statement of the accused under Sec.313 of Cr.P.C., was recorded by the Court, the accused categorically stated that he has not given any statement as alleged in this case. When the accused categorically denied about the statement made by him in the Press Meet alleged to have been held by him, it is incumbent upon the complainant to prove before this Court by producing material legal evidence that in the press meet held on 24.3.2004 accused made a statement before the members of the press which harmed the reputation of the complainant. On examination of the evidence of the PW1 and PW2 including the documents produced by the complainant, it never discloses that the PW1 and PW2 were present 25 Spl.CC No.225/2018 in the press meet held by the accused. Further more, they did not accompany Sri R.V.Deshpande, the then Minister for Medium and Large Scale Industries, who met the accused seeking a official favour in favour of the complainant company. PW1 and 2 being the officers of the complainant company, who were not present in the press meet held on 24.3.2004, who did not accompanied the Sri R.V.Deshpande, the then Minister for Medium and Large Scale Industries, therefore, their evidence will not come to the help of the complainant in any manner, so as to prove that the accused made such a statement in the press meet held on 24.3.2004 harmed the reputation of the complainant which was defamatory in nature. None of the members of the press in whose presence the accused made imputations against the complainant company, were examined in this case by the complainant. Thereby, the complainant has failed to prove by producing the material evidence that the accused has made false imputations against the complainant company in a press meet held on 24.3.2004. 23. The statements published in Times of India and Asian Age news papers, which according to the complainant are per se defamatory are marked at Ex.P.8(a) and Ex.P.9(a). On perusal of 26 Spl.CC No.225/2018 the contents of the publication referred supra makes it very clear that "Former Large and Medium Industries Minister Sri R.V.Deshpande had attempted to bribe the accused to grab 2200 acres of land in conspiracy with Tatas to get a permanent ownership in the name of the international airport project". Furthermore, the publication appeared in Asian Age news paper discloses that "accused accuses Mr.Deshpande, who offered him money to clear the State Governments proposal to allot the land to Tatas on a permanent basis for Devanahalli Internantional Airport." The publication further discloses that "he (Deshpande) offered money to him, but he refused though they were in the same party". The entire publication found in Ex.P.8(a) and Ex.P.9(a) clearly accuses Mr.Deshpande, the then Medium and Large Scale Industries Minister, who offered bribery to the accused. The star witness in this case is Mr.R.V.Deshpande, against whom the allegations of bribery was attributed, who approached the accused for approval of the project in favour of the complainant. However, the complainant did not examine Mr.R.V.Deshpande in this case, for the reasons best known to them, whose evidence would have been thrown much light on the case of the complainant, so as to prove that such a false imputations were made against the complainant company. The non-examination of 27 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Mr.R.V.Deshpande, by the complainant is fatal to his case. Thereby, the complainant has failed to produce sufficient legal evidence so as to prove that the accused deliberately, dishonestly with a malicious intention to malign the reputation of complainant company made false imputation in a press meet held on 24.3.2004. 24. From the evidence of PW1 and 2 as discussed by me supra, it is difficult to fathom how the statement of accused can be construed as an attack on the reputation of the complainant company. Reference to the statement made in the press meet alleged to have been held on 24.3.2004, which were published in the news papers as referred supra, (which has been categorically denied by the accused in his statement under Sec.313 of Cr.P.C.) there is no direct attack on the reputation of the complainant company. Even the statement made in the press conference considered in its entirety no where it suggests that the complainant company offered bribe to the accused for an official favour. Therefore, the allegations made in the complainant are not bonafide. The complaint was filed so as to humiliate and harass the accused who failed to make an official favour in favour of the complainant. 28 Spl.CC No.225/2018 25. It is submitted by the advocate for complainant that the imputations made by the accused in a press meet which were published in news papers namely Times of India and Asian Age marked at Ex.P.8(a) and Ex.P.9(a) are per se defamatory, thereby the complainant company is relieved from the burden to establish that the publication of such a imputation has lowered him in the estimation of the right thinking members of the public. When the accused categorically denied that in the press meet he has not given any such statement as alleged in this case, it is incumbent upon the complainant to prove before this Court that the accused made the imputations against the complainant in the press meet held on 24.3.2004, accordingly, the same was published in the news paper which are per se defamatory. In view of the discussion made supra, the complainant has failed to prove before this Court that the accused made imputations against the complainant in a press meet which were published in the above said news papers. The alleged defamatory statements published in the news papers attributed to the complainant, in fact the same are related to and directed to one R.V.Deshpande, the then Minister for Medium and Large Scale Industries and not to the complainant. It is apparent on the complainant, that what the accused stated in the press meet was an 29 Spl.CC No.225/2018 accurate and true report of the proceedings of the press meet, which were published in the news papers. In the absence of evidence of any member of the press who attended the press meet of the accused, produced by the complainant, the complainant has failed to prove that the accused has made imputations against the complainant so as to malign its reputation, the same are defamatory in nature. Accordingly, the complainant has failed to prove his case by producing cogent, corroborative and satisfactory material evidence. 26. The learned counsel appearing for the complainant placed his reliance on the following decisions:- 1. John Thomas Vs. Dr.K.Jagadeesan (AIR 2001 SC 2651) 2. Sahib Singh Mehra Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh (AIR 1965 SC 1451) 3. Narayan Ganesh Gadekar Vs. Parvati Sagun Gadekar (2013 Bom CR (Cri) 162) 4. Janab Sultan Salahuddin Owaisi Vs. Syed Viqaruddin and another (2006(1) ALD(Cri)190) 5. Subhiksha Trading Services Limited and Another Vs. Azim H.Premji (2011 CriLJ 2769) 30 Spl.CC No.225/2018 6. State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Ramesh and another (2011) 4 SCC 786 7. A.Brahmananda Reddy Vs. The state of A.P. represented by its PP, High Court of A.P., Hyderabad and another (2012(2) ALD 941) 8. State of Karnataka, represented by Dy.S.P., Indi Sub Division Vs. ramappa Bhimappa Kattimani and others (2006(5) KarLJ 85) 9. Nagindas Ramdas Vs. Dalapatram Ichhram alias Brijram (1974)1 SCC 242 10. Praveen Saini Vs. Reetu Kapur (RFA No.21/2018 in the High Court of Delhi) I have gone through the principles rendered in those decisions. The principles rendered in those decisions are not squarely applicable to the case of the complainant. 27. On appreciating the oral and documentary evidence produced by the complainant, it is insufficient to hold that the accused has made the imputations, the same were published in the news papers as stated above, which are per se defamatory, accordingly accused is entitled for acquittal. Hence, I answer point No.1 in the negative. 31 Spl.CC No.225/2018 28. Point No.8: In view of my findings on point No.1, this Court is of the considered view that complainant has failed to establish the guilt of the accused for the offence alleged against him beyond all reasonable doubt. Hence, accused is entitled for an order of acquittal. Accordingly, I proceed to pass the following final order; ORDER Accused is found not guilty of the offence alleged against them punishable U/s.500 of IPC . Accordingly, exercising the power under Section 255(1) of Cr.P.C accused is acquitted. The bail bond of the accused and that of his surety shall stand cancelled. (Dictated to the Judgment Writer, transcribed and typed by him, same is corrected by me and then pronounced in the Open Court on this the 15th day of September, 2018) (B.V.Patil) LXXXI ACC & SJ, Bengaluru City (CCH-82) (Special Court exclusively to deal with criminal cases related to elected MPs/MLAs in the State of Karnataka) ANNEXURE: Witnesses examined by the prosecution. PW1 V.Hemachandar PW2 Somyan Ramakrishnan 32 Spl.CC No.225/2018 Witnesses examined by the defence/accused. -- NIL Documents exhibited by the prosecution. Ex.P.1 Power of attorney Ex.P.2 Complaint Ex.P.3 Copy of notice Ex.P.4 Copy of notice Ex.P.5 News paper Ex.P.5(a) Relevant portion Ex.P.6 Copy of notice Ex.P.7 News paper Ex.P.7(a) Relevant portion Ex.P.8 News paper dt.27.3.2004 Ex.P.8(a) Relevant portion Ex.P.9 News paper dt.25.3.2004 Ex.P.9(a) Relevant portion Ex.P.10 Special power of attorney Documents exhibited by the defence/accused. - NIL List of Material Objects marked by the prosecution.--NIL LXXXI ACC & SJ, Bengaluru City (CCH-82) Rrk.