State vs . Raghav @Rahul & Ors. E-Fir No. ... on 5 February, 2022 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 IN THE COURT OF MS. UDITA JAIN GARG: METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-06, WEST DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURT, DELHI State vs. Raghav @Rahul & Ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 U/sec. 379/411/34 IPC PS: Hari Nagar Date of institution of the case: 17.03.2017 Date on which judgment is reserved: Not reserved Date on which judgment is delivered: 05.02.2022 JUDGMENT a) Date of commission of the offence : 10.10.2016 b) Name of the complainant : Sh. Sunil Khanna c) Name of the accused and his parentage :1. Raghav @Rahul S/o Sh. Radhey Shyam R/o H. No. 16/451 I Block Gali No. 7, Papa Nagar, Karol Bagh, Delhi. 2. Pradeep @ Naresh S/o Sh. Babu Lal R/o H.No. 280A, G.No. 8, Nehru Nagar, Anand Parbat, Delhi d) Offence complained of or proved : Sec. 379/411/34 IPC e) Plea of the accused : Pleaded not guilty f) Final order : Acquitted Page 1 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 g) Date of such order : 05.02.2022 h) Brief reasons for the just decision of the case: Succinctly stated, the facts of the prosecution case are that on 10.10.2016, an E- FIR was received regarding theft of a scooty make New Active Deluxe bearing registration number DL-6S-AH-1545. The investigation was marked to ASI Kailash Chand who contacted the complainant and recorded his statement. On 23 December 2016, the alleged scooty was recovered from the possession of the accused persons. Consequently, they were arrested in the present case and investigation was undertaken. After completion of the investigation, charge-sheet under sections 379 / 411 / 34 IPC was filed before the court. Consequently, accused were summoned to face the trial. On their appearance in the Court, the copies of documents, relied upon by the prosecution, were supplied to them as per norms. Vide order dated 28.02.2020, charge under sections 411 / 34 IPC was framed against the accused to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To bring home the guilt of the accused persons, prosecution has cited as many as nine witnesses. The story of prosecution is based upon the statement of complainant. Thus, it can be said that the entire edifice of the prosecution is the statement of complainant. Therefore, he was summoned by the court to depose about the incident. However, despite availing numerous opportunities and despite issuance of process through the DCP, he did not enter the witness box. Consequently, he was dropped from the list of evidence and PE was closed. Request of the learned APP for State to examine remaining prosecution witnesses was declined as no useful purpose would be served by examining the rest of the witnesses, who are formal in nature. In this Page 2 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 regard reference may be made to a Division Bench judgment of the Hon'ble Delhi High Court passed in the case of Govind & Ors vs. The State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi ) 104(2003) DLT 510 wherein it was held that "...In cases where ultimate chance of conviction is very bleak or there is no prospect of the case ending in conviction in such cases no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution and trial to continue. It is advisable to truncate or snip the proceedings and save valuable time of the courts. The trial should not be continued only for the purpose of formally completing the proceedings to pronounce the conclusion on a future date..........." As no incriminating evidence has come on record against the accused, recording of their statement under section 313 of the Code was also dispensed with. I have heard the arguments and perused the file very carefully. Arguments It is submitted by the learned defence counsel that the accused have been charged for the offences punishable under sections 411 / 34 IPC but the prosecution has failed to produce the complainant for his examination and the alleged stolen/recovered scooty despite availing numerous opportunities and in the absence of the testimony of complainant, there is nothing on record to connect the accused with the offences charged with. He placed reliance on a judgment passed by a Division Bench of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the case of State (Delhi Adminsitration) vs. Ravinder Kumar @ Ravi 1995II AD (Delhi) 6 wherein it was held as under:- "..Further, Major Chakarvarty alone could have testified whether scooter Ex. P-1 was the one which belonged to him and was stolen. He has not been produced and examined as a witness in the case. Thus, the best evidence for establishing identity of the recovered property and the stolen property was Page 3 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 not produced". He submitted that in the present case also the best evidence i.e. the complainant and the scooty was not produced before the court. He, therefore, requested that the accused may be acquitted of the charge levelled against them. Per contra, it was argued by the learned APP for the State that accused was found in possession of a stolen scooty and if a person is found in possession of property recently stolen, and of which he can give no reasonable account, court can presume that he is a thief. Thus, according to the learned APP for the State recent unexplained possession alone may be sufficient to raise a permissible inference of guilt. Issue 1. Whether the accused persons had committed theft of the scooty belonging to the complainant? 2. Whether the accused persons received this stolen property i.e. scooty "knowing or having reason to believe the some to be stolen property"? Decision and brief reasons for the same It is the cardinal principle of Criminal Jurisprudence, that the accused is presumed to be innocent and, therefore, the burden lies on the prosecution to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, the prosecution is under legal obligation, to prove each and every ingredient of the offence beyond any reasonable doubt. This general burden never shifts and it always rests on the prosecution. At the conclusion of the trial, the prosecution can succeed only on discharging its burden of proving the case against the accused. Strongest of suspicion, does not constitute the proof required. Keeping in view the principle of law laid down in cateena of judgments by the superior courts, now let us see, as to whether the prosecution has been able to prove its case, against the accused, beyond a reasonable doubt. Page 4 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 To bring home the guilt of the accused, prosecution has cited as many as nine witnesses in the list of witnesses annexed with the charge-sheet. Out of these nine witnesses, Sh.Sunil Khanna was the complainant. Rest witnesses are formal in nature. It is the case of the prosecution that the complainant lodged a complaint regarding theft of his scooty. However, the said witness did not enter the witness box despite availing numerous opportunities. Now, this court will take up the issues one by one. Issue No.1 It was argued on behalf of the State that if a person is found in possession of property recently stolen, and of which he can give no reasonable account, court can presume that he is a thief. According to the learned APP for the State recent unexplained possession alone may be sufficient to raise a permissible inference of guilt. Per contra, it was argued on behalf of the accused that presumption under the aforesaid section does not arise unless ownership of articles, theft and recent possession are established by the prosecution. He submitted that before a presumption under section 114 , Illustration (a) Indian Evidence Act can arise, it must be proved that the goods found in possession of the accused have been stolen. The onus of proof regarding these aspects never shifts, it lies on the prosecution. He submitted that since the ownership and theft of the scooty have not been proved by the prosecution, the presumption under illustration (a) to section 114 of the Evidence Act is not available. Now, this court will deal with the issue whether a presumption should be drawn under illustration (a) of section 114 Evidence Act? Page 5 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 For deciding this issue, it would be advantageous to refer section 378 and 380 IPC. Section 378 IPC defines theft. It reads as under:- 378. Theft.--Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any moveable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft. Explanation 1.--A thing so long as it is attached to the earth, not being movable property, is not the subject of theft; but it becomes capable of being the subject of theft as soon as it is severed from the earth. Explanation 2.--A moving effected by the same act which affects the severance may be a theft. Explanation 3.--A person is said to cause a thing to move by removing an obstacle which prevented it from moving or by separating it from any other thing, as well as by actually moving it. Explanation 4.--A person, who by any means causes an animal to move, is said to move that animal, and to move everything which, in consequence of the motion so caused, is moved by that animal. Explanation 5.--The consent mentioned in the definition may be express or implied, and may be given either by the person in possession, or by any person having for that purpose authority either express or implied. Section 379 IPC provides for punishment for theft. 379. Punishment for theft.--whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. Let us see if prosecution has been able to prove beyond reasonable doubt that theft was committed and the scooty was stolen from the possession of the complainant? Page 6 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 For establishing the ingredients of the offence for theft under section 378 IPC, the prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused had dishonestly moved the scooty of the complainant from his possession without his consent. However, despite availing numerous opportunities, prosecution has neither examined the complainant nor produced the case property during the course of investigation or trial. Thus, nothing has come on record to prove that the accused had dishonestly taken away the scooty out of the possession of complainant without his consent. As far as presumption under section 114 of the Act is concerned, this court is of the considered opinion that the presumption permitted by section 114 of the Act does not arise until the prosecution has established two facts; namely, the ownership of the articles in question and the theft of that article. However, in the case in hand, the prosecution has miserably failed to prove that the scooty was missing from the custody of complainant. Thus, neither the ownership of the scooty nor its theft was established. Since the complainant could not be examined despite giving numerous opportunities, nothing could come out on the record to prove the incident or the necessary ingredients of the offence punishable under section 378 IPC as there is no direct evidence to connect the accused with the crime of committing theft. Issue no. 2 Before this court adverts to rival submissions made by the learned APP for the State and the learned defence counsel, it again proposes to refer to certain relevant provisions of IPC . Section 411 IPC reads as under: Sec.411- Dishonestly receiving stolen property-Whoever Page 7 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both." The term "stolen property" is defined in section 410 IPC. It reads as under:- Sec.410. Stolen property--Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft, or by extortion, or by robbery, and property which has been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which 1[***] criminal breach of trust has been committed, is designated as "stolen property", [whether the transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust has been committed, within or without 3[India]]. But, if such property subsequently comes into the possession of a person legally entitled to the possession thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property. Thus, in every case under section 411 IPC two facts viz. that a theft was committed and certain articles were stolen, and that the stolen articles were recovered from the possession of the accused have to be established by direct evidence. If it is proved that a theft was committed and that soon after it was committed, the stolen property was recovered from the possession of the accused, presumption can be raised under section 114 , Illustration (a) of the Indian Evidence Act that the accused is either the thief or the receiver of the property knowing it to be stolen. Illustration (a) of section 114 , Evidence Act runs as follows: The Court may presume: (a) that a man who is in possession of stolen goods, soon after the theft is either the thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for his possession. Thus, in order to make out an offence under section 411 IPC, the prosecution is required to establish that the property in question is a stolen property. In the present Page 8 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 case in hand, the stolen scooty was allegedly recovered from the possession of the accused. It is elementary that there can be no offence of dishonestly receiving stolen property unless the property which is alleged to be the subject of such receiving, answers the description of "stolen property" defined under section 410 IPC. To prove its case, prosecution has cited as many as nine witnesses. However, the first informant/complainant/superdar did not enter the witness box despite numerous opportunities. Therefore, the recovery of the stolen scooty alleged to has been made at the instance of the accused does not connect him with the crime as no evidence is adduced by the prosecution to show that the scooty had, in fact, been stolen from the possession of the complainant or that the same belonged to him. The factum of theft could have been proved only by the complainant, who has not been examined in Court by the prosecution despite giving numerous opportunities. Even the case property i.e. the scooty was not produced before the court at any point of time. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that prosecution has failed to prove its case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt. Result The theft of the scooty itself has not been proved due to non-examination of complainant. Obviously in such a scenario the scooty allegedly recovered from the possession of accused is not proved to be a stolen property as defined under section 410 IPC. Until and unless the case property is proved to be stolen property which is a basic requirement, offence punishable under section 411 IPC is not made out. Therefore, keeping in view the overall conspectus of the case, this court is of the considered view that the prosecution has miserably failed to discharge the burden imposed on it by law of satisfying this court beyond reasonable doubt of the guilt of the accused. Therefore, this court gives benefit of doubt to the accused and Page 9 of 10 State vs. Raghav @Rahul & ors. E-FIR No. 29988/2016 accordingly, accused Raghav @ Rahul and Pradeep @ Naresh are acquitted of the charge levelled against them. File be consigned to record room after due compliance. Announced in open Court on 05th day of February, 2022 (Udita Jain Garg) MM-06, West District, Tis Hazari Courts/ Delhi/05.02.2022 This judgment contains 10 pages and each page bears my signature. (Udita Jain Garg) MM-06, West District, Tis Hazari Courts/ Delhi/05.02.2022 Page 10 of 10