Kailash Sharma vs The State Of Assam And Anr on 6 March, 2019 Author: Rumi Kumari Phukan Bench: Rumi Kumari Phukan Page No.# 1/6 GAHC010207262016 THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH) Case No. : Crl.Pet. 740/2016 1:KAILASH SHARMA S/O LT. PREMODA KANTA SARMA R/O LAMB ROAD, NEAR UGROTARA TEMPLE, GUWAHATI - 781001, DIST. KAMRUP METRO, ASSAM. VERSUS 1:THE STATE OF ASSAM and ANR. 2:SRI PARESHKALITA S/O LT. DIGAMBAR KALITA R/O UZANBAZAR NEAR JURPUKHURI PAR GUWAHATI - 781001 DIST. KAMRUP METRO ASSAM Advocate for the Petitioner : MR.A K DAS Advocate for the Respondent : PP, ASSAM BEFORE Advocate for the revision petitioner: Mr. A.K. Das, Ms. J. Bhuyan, Mr. B. Sinha and Mr. M.J. Gogoi. Advocate for the respondents: Mr. A.K. Bhuyan, Ms. B. Bhuyan, Ms. N. Choudhury. Page No.# 2/6 BEFORE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE RUMI KUMARI PHUKAN Date of hearing and judgment: 06.03.2019. JUDGEMENT AND ORDER The petitioner herein is the member of Bar Deuri Samaj of Sri Sri Ugratara Temple (in short 'the Temple') and the respondent No.2 is the Secretary of the Managing Committee of the said Temple. There was complaint of anomalies in the management of the Temple. One Prabhat Ch. Bhattacharya has already filed the W.P. (C) No.4873/2015, complaining about the illegal constitution of the Managing Committee, in which case the respondent No.2 is one of the party respondents. Another criminal case was also filed by said Mr. Bhattacharya against the respondent No.2 and others alleging embezzlement of money of the said Temple which was registered as Latasil P.S. Case No.293/2015, under Section 120 / 420 / 406 / 468 / 499 IPC. 2. In view of all above, the present petitioner being one of the members of the Bar Deuri Samaj, held a Press Conference on behalf of the Bar Deuri Samaj to enlightening the matters about various anomalies and malpractices resorted by the illegally constituted Managing Committee of the said Temple. The petitioner was vociferous against the private respondent No.2, who is the Secretary of the said Managing Committee. Pursuant to the said Press Conference and the resultant paper publication, the respondent No.2 filed a complaint before the Court against the accused/petitioner Which was registered as C.R. Case No.1822C/2015, alleging that the said news article published in the newspaper 'Asomiya Pratidin' on the 19.07.2015 issue that the complainant has misappropriated huge sum of money and is an antisocial element in the society, are all false and baseless and for the publication of such false and concocted allegation, not supported by any document, the reputation of the complainant has been lowered in the society. Page No.# 3/6 3. The learned Trial Court on examination of the respondent No.2/complainant and other witnesses under Section 202 CrPC, has taken cognizance of the offence under Section 501 / 502 of the IPC, against the present accused/petitioner and the editor, printer and publisher of the 'Asomiya Pratidin' newspaper. The charge has been framed accordingly and the case is at the stage of hearing. 4. At this juncture, the petitioner has come forward with the present petition under Section 482 of the CrPC, for quashing the entire proceeding including the charge on the ground that the statement made by the petitioner before the Press Conference has been made in good faith and interest of public and it is submitted that the case of the petitioner will fall within the 1 st and 9th Exceptions of Section 500 of the IPC and it is a fair comment and filing of the complaint case was nothing but suppression of guilt of the complainant. 5. Heard submissions of learned counsel for petitioner and Mr AK Bhuyan, learned counsel for respondent no.2. 6. Learned counsel for petitioner, basing upon averments made in the petition and pointing at the affidavit of the petitioner, contends that the complainant himself has admitted the authenticity of the news item published in the said newspaper and submitted that the respondent no.2 has criminal antecedent which reveals from the FIR filed by Sri Prabhat Bhattacharjee. On another score it is urged before this court that the cognizance taken by the court is bad in law inasmuch as the court did not conduct proper inquiry as mandated in Section 202 of the CrPC. 7. Per contra, learned counsel for respondent no.2 has strenuously objected to the said contention that publishing news item without ascertaining authenticity of the allegation raising serious imputation against the complainant itself is sufficient to take cognizance of the offence. The learned trial court, after conducting preliminary inquiry, took cognizance of the offence and so the submission of the petitioner side that cognizance is taken without any inquiry is devoid of any merit. The further contention raised that such a statement has been made by the accused on good faith and the same Page No.# 4/6 will come within the Exceptions can be challenged and rebutted before the trial court in due manner and as per Section 105 of the Evidence Act, 1872 the burden lies on the petitioner to prove his plea. Lastly, it is submitted that the complaint case was filed on 8.9.2015 and cognizance was taken after framing charge and two witnesses were already examined and the petitioner is required to substantiate his plea by way of requisite/rebuttal evidence and so the matter of quashing at this fag end of trial is not at all justified on any of the grounds raised before this court. 8. On due consideration of the matters on record and the documents annexed it reveals that there is some dispute over management of the temple among the members of the committee and the petitioner has admittedly made statement in the newspaper regarding misappropriation of money by the complainant/respondent no.2, authenticity of which is yet to be tested and proved. 9. The grievance of the complainant over the imputation of such unproven allegation may be there. The reputation of an individual is a quality which everyone wants to protect. In the given background while the complainant has made out a prima facie allegation against the petitioner in the complaint petition within the purview of Sections 500 and 501 of the IPC and when the trial already proceeded to a great extent, quashing of a complaint at this stage is not justifiable. 10. On the other hand, the petitioner has not proved the plea of good faith and public interest. 11. For better appreciation, Section 105 of the Evidence Act, 1872 is reproduced below: "105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions. When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code 45 of 1860, or within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part of the same Code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall presume the absence of such circumstances." 12. Learned counsel for respondent no.2 referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Harbhajan Singh v. State of Punjab AIR 1966 SC 97 to contend that the plea of good faith must be Page No.# 5/6 proved as strictly as if the complainant was being tried for the offences imputed to him. 13. In Harbhajan Singh (Supra) it is held that if an accused claims benefit of Exceptions to Section 105 of the Evidence Act, 1872, the burden of proving such plea falls on the accused. If it can be shown that the accused has led evidence to show that he acted in good faith and by test of probabilities that evidence proved his case he will be entitled to claim the benefit of Exception 9. In other words, the onus of an accused person may be compared to the onus of a party in civil proceedings and just as civil proceedings the court trying an issue makes its decision by adopting the case of probabilities must take criminal hold that the plea made by the accused is proved if a preponderance of probabilities is established by evidence led by him. Explaining the requirement of good faith it is held that an act is said to be done in good faith which is done honestly and with due care and caution. The mere plea that the accused believed that what he has stated in publishing was true in itself will not sustain his case of good faith under the 9 th Exception unless it is proved by rendering evidence. 14. As discussed above the petitioner has not proved his plea by adducing requisite evidence in terms of the decision mentioned above. 15. The Supreme Court, in State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, held that the power of quashing criminal proceedings should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in rarest of the rate cases. The extraordinary and inherent power do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court according to its whim and caprice. The following categories are mentioned as illustration wherein the extraordinary power under Article 226 of the Constitution or the inherent power u/s 482 of the CrPC can be exercised by the High Court either to prevent abuse of the process of the court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice: "(a) where the allegations made in the First Information Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused; (b) where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if Page No.# 6/6 any, accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code; (c) where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or 'complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused; (d) where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code; (e) where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused; (f) where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party; (g) where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge." 16. In the instant case the allegation made in the complaint if taken at its face value, prima facie constitutes an offence against the accused and the learned trial court after due procedure has taken cognisance of the offence and proceeded to trial and quashing the entire proceeding at this stage will be against the ends of justice. It is held that it is not a fit case to invoke the provisions of Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 17. Accordingly the petition is dismissed. JUDGE Comparing Assistant