State vs . Ravinder @ Gaurav on 21 April, 2023 IN THE COURT OF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-02, NORTH EAST DISTRICT, KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI PRESIDED BY: SH. VIPUL SANDWAR JUDGMENT STATE Vs. RAVINDER @ GAURAV FIR NO. : 06/2010, U/s 382/411 IPC PS : SEELAMPUR A. CIS No. of the Case : 461221/2015 B. FIR No. : 06/2010 C. Date of Institution : 18.08.2011 D. Date of Commission of Offence : 04.01.2010 E. Name of the complainant : Sakib S/o Mohd. Akeel, R/o K-50, Gali no.15, Janta Colony, Welcome, Seelampur, Delhi F. Name of the Accused, his : Ravinder @ Gaurav S/o Parentage & Addresses Ramesh Chand, R/o Som Bazar, Tilak Ram Colony, Loni, Ghaziabad, U. P. G. Offence complained of : U/s 382/411 IPC H. Representation on behalf of : Ms. Shivani Joshi, Ld. APP State I. Plea of the Accused : Pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. J. Order reserved on : 17.01.2023 K. Date of Order : 21.04.2023 L. Final Order : Acquitted FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.1 of 17 Brief Statement of Reasons for Decision of the Case 1. Briefly stated the case of the prosecution is that the present FIR has been registered on the complaint of complainant Sakib wherein he has stated that on 04.02.2010 at about 11:30 pm while he was returning from work he boarded TSR near Seelampur flyover juice shop, two unknown persons already in the TSR and he was made to sit in between two boys. After going to some distance one of the boys asked the other boy to take out thing and he started looking at the other boy. The first boy took out two mobile phones Nokia 6300 and Tata, Corporation Bank ATR card, Metro card, documents and cash around Rs.600/- from his pocket. He asked the TSR driver to drive at a slow speed as he was driving at a very high speed but he did not reduce the speed. He pushed the driver and the driver made him alight forcefully at Welcome Metro Station and the two boys alongwith TSR escaped. The complainant suspected that the two boys might have weapon due to which he was afraid and went to his house. Next day he came to the PS and filed his complaint. The accused was charge-sheeted for offence punishable under Section 382 / 411 / 34 IPC. 2. FIR was registered and has been investigated by the officials of Police Station Seelampur and IO/SI Vinay Kumar filed the charge sheet against the accused upon which cognizance was taken on 14.07.2010 by the learned Predecessor of this Court. 3. Accused appeared before the Court and copy of chargesheet along with other documents under Section 207 FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.2 of 17 Cr.P.C . was supplied to him on 14.07.2010. 4. Charge was framed vide order dated 18.08.2011 for the offence punishable Under Section 382 / 411 IPC against accused by the learned Predecessor of this Court, to which, the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 5. Thereafter, matter was listed for Prosecution Evidence. The Prosecution has examined a total of 05 witnesses in support of its case. In nutshell, the testimony of the prosecution witnesses is as follows :- (i) PW1 Mohd. Sakib is the complainant. He has deposed that on 04.02.2010 at about 11:30 pm while he was returning from office at Gol Market, Connaught Place he deboarded metro at Seelampur station and boarded an auto. Two persons were already sitting in the back seat of auto and the driver was at the driving seat. He has made to sit in between the passengers already sitting in the back seat. After moving a while they started communicated with each other in sign language. One the person uttered to the other that chhote bring out the weapon "chhote samaan nikal". They started to snatch away his mobile phone and belongings. On resisting he was beaten up with screw driver. They also applied some thing on his face which had an intoxicating effect on him. The accused persons managed to snatch two mobile phones (Nokia 6300 and Tata), Corporation Bank ATM card, Metro card and his bag containing lunch box, office papers and cash amounting to Rs.600/- - Rs.700/-. He was thrown from the auto rickshaw in front of Welcome Metro Station and they vanished from spot. He has stated that even FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.3 of 17 though considerable time has elapsed accused Ravinder @ Gaurav is the person who was involved in snatching away his articles. He has correctly identified the accused in Court. The witness identified the case property, however, stated that the screen of the same had been changed and it does not bear any scratch mark. During his cross-examination, he has stated that he does not remember the registration number of said TSR. He has also stated that he does not approach the security guard posted at metro station for his help. He returned back to his house after 30- 45 minutes from Welcome metro station. He has stated that he identified the accused in police station while he was sitting inside the cell. He had not furnished any receipt regarding the ownership of mobile. He was not aware of the IMEI numbers of the mobile phones. He has also stated that site plan was not prepared at in his presence. No body was interrogated in his presence. He denied the suggestion that the incident took place at some place other than the spot. (ii) PW2 HC Yogesh he alongwith SI Vinay Kumar were on patroling duty on 01.06.2010. When they reached at Dharampura red light one secret informer informed them that the accused fo the present case is standing at T point Seelampur. They reached Seelampur T point where the secret informer pointed towards the accused and thereafter, they apprehended the accused. SI Vinay Kumar requested passerby to join the investigation but none agreed and left the spot. Accused was formally searched and one mobile Nokia 6300 was recovered from his right pocket. One another mobile Nokia 5300 was also recovered which the accused stated that to be his personal phone. He stated that Nokia 6300 was the stolen property. IO seized the case property vide FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.4 of 17 seizure memo Ex. PW2/A. On enquiry, accused revealed his name as Ravinder @ Gaurav. IO prepared other documents at the spot. In his cross-examination, he has denied the suggestion that no public persons were requested to join the investigation. He has stated that he left the PS for patrolling but had not made any DD entry. He met the secret informer at about 08:30 pm. At about 08:55 pm they reached Seelampur T point and the secret informer reached there at about 09:10 pm. The secret informer remained there 10-15 minutes. He has stated that he cannot tell whether IO had offered his search prior to making personal search of accused. He has stated that no public persons were invited to join the proceedings regarding the sealing of the mobile phones. He has also stated that no handing over memo was prepared regarding the handing over of the seal to him after its use. He has stated that personal search memo of accused does not mention the model/IMEI number of the phone recovered from the accused. He denied the suggestion that all the documents were prepared at PS. (iii) PW3 ASI Harbir Singh was posted as DO on 05.01.2010. at about 04:05 pm SI Vinay handed over one rukka in the PS. On the basis of said rukka he recorded the present FIR and made an endorsement on the rukka. He handed over the copy of FIR and original rukka to SI Vinay. In his cross-examination, he has stated that SI Vinay came to the PS at about 04:05 pm and left the PS at about 04:30 pm. (iv) PW4 SI Vinai Kumar is the IO and has stated that on 05.01.2010 complainant Sakib came to the PS at about 03:00 pm and gave the oral complaint. He recorded his statement which is Ex. PW1/A, endorse the same and handed it over to the Duty FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.5 of 17 Officer for registration of the case. He started investigation of the case and recorded supplementary statement of the complainant. At the instance of complainant he prepared site plan Ex. PW1/DA. On 01.06.2010 he alongwith Ct. Yogesh were on patrolling duty at Dharampura red light and was informed by secret informer that the accused was standing at Seelampur red light for selling stolen mobile phones. He invited 3-4 persons to join the investigation but they went away without disclosing their names and addresses. He alongwith Ct. Yogesh on the identification of secret informer apprehended the accused and from his personal search Nokia 6300 phone was recovered from his right pocket. Seized the phone and prepared the pullanda with the seal of MK and handed over the seal to Ct. Yogesh. Prepared arrest memo, personal search memo and recorded the disclosure statement of the accused. He identified the accused correctly in the Court. Initially he did not identify the case property in the Court. However, later after seeing through his spectacles he identified the same. This witness was not cross examined by accused despite giving an opporutnity. (v) PW5 Sh. Amitabh Rawat, JSCC/ASCJ/GJ, Shahdara, Karkardooma Courts he was posted as MM at Karkardooma Courts on 0406.2010 and was working as Link MM of Sh. Sanjay Khangwal, Ld. MM. An application was moved by IO/SI Vinay Kumar for conducting TIP of accused Ravinder @ Gaurav was marked to him by Ld. Link MM and he had fixed the TIP for 07.06.2010. He recorded the TIP proceedings in which accused Ravinder @ Gaurav had refused to participate. He was warned that his refusal would have adverse influence against him, despite that he insisted not to join the TIP proceedings. After recording FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.6 of 17 the proceedings he sent it to the Court concerned in a sealed envelope. He was not cross examined by accused despite giving an opportunity. 6. PE was closed on 08.03.2021 and matter was listed for statement of accused on 23.03.2021. On an application under section 311 Cr. PC Ld. counsel for accused was allowed vide order dated 08.03.2017 to cross examine PW2 HC Yogesh and PW4 SI Vinay Kumar subject to deposition of cost of Rs.2,000/-. Vide order dated 28.10.2022, this Court observed that order dated 08.03.2017 was clear that the cross-examination of PW2 and PW4 was subject to their availability only upon deposition of cost of Rs.2,000/-. No cost was deposited till the said date i.e. 28.10.2022 and summons were sent to the above said PWs on various occasion. Finally PE was closed on 28.10.2022 and matter was listed for statement of accused under Section 313 Cr.P.C. The same was recorded on 03.12.2022. Accused stated that he does not want to lead defence evidence and the matter was fixed for final arguments. 7. Final arguments heard. Case record perused meticulously. 8. This Court has thoughtfully considered the material on record and arguments advanced with due circumspection. 9. The prosecution has charged accused Ravinder @ Gaurav with offence punishable under S. 382 IPC. The offence punishable under S. 382 IPC is defined as follows: "382. Theft after preparation made for causing FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.7 of 17 death, hurt or restraint in order to the committing of the theft.--Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of re- straint, to any person, in order to the committing of such theft, or in order to the effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft, or in order to the retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. Illustrations (a) A commits theft on property in Z's possession; and, while committing this theft, he has a loaded pistol under his garment, having provided this pistol for the purpose of hurting Z in case Z should resist. A has committed the offence defined in this section. (b) A picks Z's pocket, having posted several of his companions near him, in order that they may restrain Z, if Z should perceive what is passing and should resist, or should attempt to apprehend A. A has committed the offence defined in this section." 10. The offence of S. 382 IPC is a graver offence of S. 379 IPC and firstly the offence of S. 379 IPC has to be proved. " Section 379 Indian Penal Code states that "whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both." 11. Section 378 defines the offence of Theft, whereas, section 379 IPC prescribes punishment for theft. Theft, as defined under section 378 is the dishonest removal and taking of movable property out of the possession of any person without his consent. It is an offence against possession and not against ownership." 12. To constitute the offence of theft, the following ingredients are required: (a) The accused must have a dishonest intention to FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.8 of 17 take the property. (b) The property must be movable (c) The property must be taken out of the possession of another person, resulting in wrongful gain by one and wrongful loss to another; (d) The property must be moved in order to such taking, which results in obtaining property by deception; and (e) Taking must be without that person's consent ( either express or implied). 13. In the present case the star witness of the prosecution is PW1 complainant. He has deposed before this Court that on 04.02.2010 at about 11:30 pm when he was returning back from his office he took an auto rickshaw in which two persons were already sitting. He was made to sit in between the passengers. After moving for a while one co-passenger of PW1 uttered to the other "chhote samaan nikal". Thereafter, they started to snatch his mobile phone and belongings. On resisting he was beaten up with screw driver. The accused persons also applied something on his face which had an intoxicating effect. PW1 has deposed that the accused persons managed to snatch two mobile phones, (Nokia 6300 and one mobile of Tata company), one Corporation Bank ATM card, one Metro card, bag containing lunch box, papers and cash worth Rs.600-Rs.700/-. PW1 has also deposed that when he was called by the police to identify the accused he saw one boy who resembled as the person involved in the incident. PW has deposed that even the considerable time has elapsed he identified the accused present in the Court as the person involved in snatching away his articles. During his cross- examination he has stated that when he was being snatched he FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.9 of 17 raised alarm but no body was there to help him. Even after being thrown at Welcome metro station he did not approach to the security guards posted at metro station for help. In his cross- examination he has stated that he has not furnished any receipts regarding the ownership of the mobile phone. Also he was not aware about the IMEI number of the same. 14. No other eye witness to the incident has been brought by the prosecution and the other witnesses examined by the prosecution are formal in nature. PW1 is the sole prosecution witness and no corroboration of his testimony has been done by any other witness. Improvements have been made in deposition of PW1 before Court as compared with the version recorded by police under section 161 Cr. PC. In the absence of corroboration careful consideration of the testimony of PW1 is required. PW1 has not been able to produce the receipts or IMEI number of any of the stolen mobile phones. Accordingy, the prosecution has failed to prove the commission of offence punishable under section 379 IPC. 15. The prosecution has charged the accused Ravinder @ Gaurav with offence punishable under S. 411 IPC. It reads as follows: "411. Dishonestly receiving stolen property.-- Whoever dishonestly receives or retains any stolen property, knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both." FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.10 of 17 16. The essential ingredients which the Prosecution is required to prove to establish the guilt of accused beyond reasonable doubt for offence punishable under Section 411 IPC are as under : (i) That the property in question was stolen property; (ii) That the stolen property was in the possession of the accused; (iii) That it was dishonestly received or retained; and (iv) The accused knew or had reason to believe that the, property was stolen property. 17. In a criminal case, the burden of proving the allegations is on the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. Moreover, there is a presumption of innocence in favour of the accused. Hence, in this case, prosecution had to lead clear and cogent evidence which proves the recovery of stolen mobile phone as well as the factum of recovered mobile phone, being stolen property. 18. Thus, now this Court proceeds to appreciate the evidence brought on record by the Prosecution. 19. Before appraising any evidence it is important to note that the complainant/PW1 could not produce any original bill regarding ownership of the recovery mobile. Even the IO could not produce the record of bill in the name of the complainant regarding the mobile phone in question. No document suggesting the ownership of the phone to the complainant is on record. Hence, it cannot be said that the mobile phone in question was FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.11 of 17 owned or in possession of the complainant. Accordingly, the prosecution has failed to prove that the mobile phone in question was a stolen property. 20. Apart from this, their (recovery witnesses) presence at the spot is not proved. If they had departed for duty, the entry to this effect must exist in roznamcha but that has not been proved, raising an adverse presumption against the prosecution U/s 114 (g) of the Evidence Act if the said roznamcha has been produced it would have not shown their departure. Reliance in this regard is placed upon the judgment of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Rattan Lal v. State , 1987 (2) Crimes 29. 21. No public witness was present at the time of recovery of the mobile phone from the possession of accused. With respect to offences pertaining to recovery of contraband items from the possession of accused, I find it pertinent to refer to the importance of joining a public witness to the investigation. If a public witness is not available, then the prosecution must show that sincere effort was made to ensure the presence of public witness to join the raiding party. Here I would like to refer to the observations of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Anoop Joshi Vs. State , 1992 (2) C.C. Cases 314 (HC), "It is repeatedly laid down by this court that in such cases it should be shown by the police that sincere efforts have been made to join independent witnesses. In the present case, it is evident that no such sincere efforts have been made, particularly when we find that shops were open and one or two shopkeepers could have been persuaded to join the raiding party to witness the recovery being made from the appellant. In case any of the shopkeepers had declined to join the raiding party, the police FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.12 of 17 could have later on taken legal action against such shopkeepers because they could not have escaped the rigours of law while declining to perform their legal duty to assist the police in investigation as a citizen, which is an offence under the IPC ." 22. Additionally, Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Pawan Kumar vs. Delhi Administration 1987 SCC OnLine Del 290 observed "....Here is a case where no effort was made to join any public witness even though number of them were present. No plausible explanation from the side of the prosecution is forthcoming for not joining the independent witnesses in a case of a serious nature like the present one. It may be that there is an apathy on the part of the general public to associate themselves with the Police raids or the recoveries but that apart, at least the I.O. should have made an earnest effort to join the independent witnesses. No attempt in this direction appears to have been made and this, by itself, is a circumstance throwing doubt on the arrest or the recovery of the knife from the person of the accused...." 23. The said position also find support from the observations of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sahib Singh Vs State of Punjab wherein it was held that: "Before conducting a search the police officer concerned is required to call upon some independent and respectable people of the locality to witness the search. In a given case it may so happen that no such person is available or, even if available, is not willing to be a party to such search. It may also be that after joining the search, such persons later on turn hostile. In any of these eventualities the evidence of the police officers who conducted the search cannot be disbelieved solely on the ground that no independent and respectable witness was examined to prove the search but if it is found -- as in the present case -- that no attempt was made even by the police officer concerned to join with him some persons of the locality who were admittedly available to witness the recovery, it would affect the weight of evidence of the police officer, though not FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.13 of 17 its admissibility." 24. It is well settled principle of the law that the investigating agency should join independent witnesses at the time of recovery of contraband articles, if they are available and their failure to do so in such a situation casts a shadow of doubt on the prosecution case. There is no independent public witness of the recovery and the explanation offered by the prosecution for the absence of public witness does not seem plausible. It is a very common excuse that the witnesses from the public refused to join the investigation. A police officer conducting investigation of a crime is entitled to ask anybody to join the investigation and on refusal by a person from the public the investigating officer can take action against such a person. No notice in writing was given to them to join the investigation. No action was taken qua the persons who refused to disclose their names or addresses. It is also not in dispute that the place of incident is a public place and there are lot of public offices/shops nearby. If the first few people did not join the investigation, other people could have been requested. It is not in dispute that that the spot was a public place where public persons were present. But no sincere efforts were made to make a public person to join the investigation. A public witness would have been an important link in the chain of circumstances to support the prosecution version. The failure to do so by the police officer is suggestive of the fact that the explanation for non-joining the witnesses from the public is an afterthought and is not worthy of credence. FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.14 of 17 25. The rule that the prosecution must prove its case beyond reasonable doubt is a rule of caution laid down by the Courts of Law in respect of assessing the evidence in criminal cases. In Awadhi Yadav v. State of Bihar , (1971) 3 SCC 116 at page 117, Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that: "Before a person can be convicted on the strength of circumstantial evidence, the circumstances in question must be satisfactorily established and the proved circumstances must bring home the offence to the accused beyond reasonable doubt. If those circumstances or some of them can be explained by any other reasonable hypothesis then the accused must have the benefit of that hypothesis. But in assessing the evidence imaginary possibilities have no place. What is to be considered are ordinary human probabilities." 26. In State of Haryana v. Bhagirath , (1999) 5 SCC 96 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 658 : 1999 SCC OnLine SC 577 at page 99 Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that: "But the principle of benefit of doubt belongs exclusively to criminal jurisprudence. The pristine doctrine of benefit of doubt can be invoked when there is reasonable doubt regarding the guilt of the accused. It is the reasonable doubt which a conscientious judicial mind entertains on a conspectus of the entire evidence that the accused might not have committed the offence, which affords the benefit to the accused at the end of the criminal trial. Benefit of doubt is not a legal dosage to be administered at every segment of the evidence, but an advantage to be afforded to the accused at the final end after consideration of the entire evidence, if the Judge conscientiously and reasonably entertains doubt regarding the guilt of the accused. It is nearly impossible in any criminal trial to prove all the elements with a scientific precision. A criminal court could be convinced of the guilt only beyond the range of a reasonable doubt. Of course, the expression "reasonable doubt" is incapable of definition. Modern thinking is in favour of the view that proof beyond a reasonable doubt is the same as proof which affords moral certainty to the Judge." FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.15 of 17 27. Francis Wharton, a celebrated writer on criminal law in the United States has quoted from judicial pronouncements in his book Wharton's Criminal Evidence (at p. 31, Vol. 1 of the 12th Edn.) as follows: "It is difficult to define the phrase 'reasonable doubt'. However, in all criminal cases a careful explanation of the term ought to be given. A definition often quoted or followed is that given by Chief Justice Shaw in the Webster case. He says: 'It is not mere possible doubt, because everything relating to human affairs and depending upon moral evidence is open to some possible or imaginary doubt. It is that state of the case which, after the entire comparison and consideration of all the evidence, leaves the minds of the jurors in that consideration that they cannot say they feel an abiding conviction to a moral certainty of the truth of the charge." 28. In the treatise The Law of Criminal Evidence authored by H.C. Underhill it is stated (at p. 34, Vol. 1 of the 5th Edn.) thus: "The doubt to be reasonable must be such a one as an honest, sensible and fair-minded man might, with reason, entertain consistent with a conscientious desire to ascertain the truth. An honestly entertained doubt of guilt is a reasonable doubt. A vague conjecture or an inference of the possibility of the innocence of the accused is not a reasonable doubt. A reasonable doubt is one which arises from a consideration of all the evidence in a fair and reasonable way. There must be a candid consideration of all the evidence and if, after this candid consideration is had by the jurors, there remains in the minds a conviction of the guilt of the accused, then there is no room for a reasonable doubt." 29. In Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v.State of Maharashtra (1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 1033 : (1974) 1 SCR 489 Hon'ble Supreme Court cautioned that: "the dangers of exaggerated devotion to the rule of benefit of doubt at the expense of social defence demand special emphasis in the contemporary context FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.16 of 17 of escalating crime and escape. The judicial instrument has a public accountability. The cherished principles or golden thread of proof beyond reasonable doubt which runs through the web of our law should not be stretched morbidly to embrace every hunch, hesitancy and degree of doubt." 30. In light of abovesaid discussion, it is clear that the prosecution has failed to discharge his burden of proving recovery of mobile phone from the accused and the mobile phone being stolen property. Hence, benefit of doubt has to accrue in favour of the accused. Accused Ravinder @ Gaurav, accordingly, stands acquitted for offence punishable u/s 411 IPC. 31. Accused is directed furnish bail bond and surety bond in the sum of Rs.10,000/- each u/s 437A Cr.P.C and directed to be present before the Ld. Appellate Court as and when directed. Digitally signed by VIPUL VIPUL SANDWAR SANDWAR Date: 2023.04.21 16:20:44 +0530 Announced in the open (VIPUL SANDWAR) Court on 21st April 2023 MM-02/NE/KKD COURTS FIR No.06/10 State vs. Ravinder @ Gaurav PS Seelampur Page No.17 of 17