Y.Chandra Babu vs The State Of Telangana on 20 October, 2020 Author: K. Lakshman Bench: K. Lakshman THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE K. LAKSHMAN I.A. Nos.2 AND 3 OF 2020 IN/AND CRIMINAL PETITION No.3374 OF 2020 COMMON ORDER: The present Criminal Petition is filed by the petitioner - accused under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short ' Cr.P.C .'), to quash the proceedings against him in Crime No.186 of 2020, pending on the file of Dundigal Police Station, Cyberabad Commissionerate. The petitioner is sole accused in the case. The offence alleged against him is under Section 376 (2) (f) of IPC. 2. During the pendency of the present criminal petition, 2nd respondent - de facto complainant has filed I.A. No.2 of 2020 to permit her and the accused to compromise the matter. She has also filed I.A. No.3 of 2020 to compound the offence and to quash the proceedings in the aforesaid case against the petitioner herein. 3. In support of the aforesaid I.As., the de facto complainant has filed her affidavit and joint memo signed by herself, accused and their counsel, wherein it is mentioned that the matter has been settled amicably between them. 4. Thereafter, this Court vide order dated 18.09.2020, after recording the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as respondent No.2, directed the parties to appear before the Registrar (Judicial - I) of this Court by 09.10.2020 with KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 2 reference to their identification. Similarly, this Court directed the Registrar (Judicial - I) to submit his report. Pursuant to the said order, the Registrar (Judicial - I) has submitted his report dated 25.09.2020. 5. In the report, the Registrar (Judicial-I) of this Court has stated as follows: "On oral examination, respondent No.2 has stated that she had filed a complaint against the petitioner before Dundigal Police Station, Medchal District and that the same was registered as FIR.No.186 of 2020 for the offence under Section 376(2) (f) IPC and that now she has approached the Hon'ble High Court for recording the compromise. Considering the same, the identification of the parties in the petition is established." 6. Heard Mr. G. Ravichandra Sekhar, learned counsel for the petitioner - accused, and Mr. Kondapally Shyam Sunder, learned counsel for respondent No.2 - de facto complainant, and the learned Assistant Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 - State. 7. Perused the entire material available on record. The petitioner - accused is Dean of Sri Chaitanya Junior College, Bowrampet Zone, while the de facto complainant is working as Senior Lecturer as on the date of complaint. As per the contents of the complaint, the allegations levelled against the petitioner - accused herein are that on 02.10.2019 the accused casually called the de facto complainant and asked her to come to Gandi Maisamma Cross Road, KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 3 and accordingly, she went there, where the accused sexually abused and raped her in his car. The accused also threatened her not to reveal the incident to anyone. She being a heart patient, she kept quiet, but the accused continued the said torture and created conditions that respondent No.2 quit the job. She has complained to Higher Authorities of the College, including Mr. Ravi Kumar, AGM, but of no use. Thus, the de facto complainant gave a complaint with the police, who in turn, registered it a case in Crime No.186 of 2020 for the offence under Section 376 (2) (f) of IPC against the petitioner - accused. During pendency of the said crime, the matter has been settled between the parties, and to that effect, they have arrived at compromise and accordingly, filed the aforesaid petition as well as I.As. 8. The learned counsel for the petitioner placing reliance on the principle laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Gian Singh v. State of Punjab1 , would submit that this Court is having inherent power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to compound the offences which are non-compoundable. 9. In Arun Singh v. State Of U.P2 , the Hon'ble Apex Court by referring to its earlier judgments including Gian Singh1, Parbatbhai Aahir v. State of Gujarat3 and Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab4 , held that the offences which have serious impact upon society and 1 . (2012) 10 SCC 303 2 . (2020) 3 SCC 736 3 . (2017) 9 SCC 641 4 . (2014) 6 SCC 466 KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 4 continuance of trial of such cases is founded on the over-ridding effect of public interests in punishing persons for such serious offences, quashment of proceedings is not proper under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. Quashment of proceedings in respect of offences arising out of commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or such similar transactions or has any element of civil dispute thus it stands on a distinct footing. In such cases, settlement even if arrived at between the complainant and the accused, the same cannot constitute a valid ground to quash the F.I.R. or the charge sheet. 10. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Narinder Singh4, discussed about the inherent powers of this Court under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and held that in respect of serious offences, like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. or other offences of mental depravity under IPC or offences of moral turpitude under special statutes, like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while working in that capacity, the settlement between the offender and the victim can have no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences which overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavor having arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family dispute, where the wrong is basically to the victim and the offender and the victim have settled all disputes between them amicably, irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been made compoundable, the High Court KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 5 may within the framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal proceeding or criminal complaint or FIR if it is satisfied that on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any likelihood of the offender being convicted and by not quashing the criminal proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be defeated. 11. In Pramod Suryabhan Pawar v. The State of Maharashtra5 , the Hon'ble Supreme Court by referring to its earlier judgments including State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal6 , Inder Mohan Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal7 , Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar v. State of Maharashtra8 and Kaini Rajan v. State of Kerala9 , and on examining the scope of Sections 375 and 376 of IPC and also the contents of the complaint therein, more particularly, the allegations, held that the allegations in the said FIR do not on their face indicate that the promise by the appellant was false, or that the complainant engaged in sexual relations on the basis of this promise. There is no allegation in the FIR that when the appellant promised to marry the complainant, it was done in bad faith or with the intention to deceive her. The appellant's failure in 2016 to fulfill his promise made in 2008 cannot be construed to mean the promise itself was false. The allegations in the FIR indicate that the complainant was aware that there existed obstacles to marrying the appellant since 2008, and that she and the appellant continued to engage in sexual relations long 5 . (2019) 9 SCC 608 6 . 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 7 . (2007) 12 SCC 1 8 . 2018 SCC Online SC 3100 9 . (2013) 9 SCC 113 KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 6 after their getting married had become a disputed matter. Even thereafter, the complainant travelled to visit and reside with the appellant at his postings and allowed him to spend his weekends at her residence. The allegations in the FIR belie the case that she was deceived by the appellant's promise of marriage. Therefore, even if the facts set out in the complainant's statements are accepted in totality, no offence under Section 375 of the IPC has occurred. By examining the contents of the complaint and also the powers of this Court under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and by referring to its earlier judgments, the Hon'ble Supreme Court quashed the FIR lodged against the appellant therein. The allegation against the appellant therein was also under Section 376 , 417 , 504 and 506 (2) of IPC and Sections 3 (1) (u) , (w) and 3 (2) (vii) of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities Act, 1989 (as amended by the Amendment Act, 2015). Thus, the Hon'ble Supreme Court categorically held that this Court can quash the FIR even for the offence under Section 376 of IPC which is a non-compoundable offence and that non-compoundable offence can be compounded. 12. In XYZ v. State of Gujarat10 , a Three-Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court by referring to the facts therein, held that the High Court exceeded the scope of its jurisdiction conferred under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and quashed the proceedings for the offence under Sections 376 , 499 and 506 (2) of IPC. In the said case, the allegations against respondent No.2 was that he has exploited the 10 . (2019) 10 SCC 337 KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 7 appellant sexually, for which she has lodged the complaint with police, who in turn, registered a case for the offences under Sections 376 , 499 and 506 (2) of IPC. Respondent No.2 therein has filed a petition under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. before the High Court of Gujarat, and the High Court of Gujarat has quashed the said proceedings in FIR by referring to the agreement entered between the appellant and respondent No.2 therein. Thereafter, appellant therein (victim) approached the Hon'ble Apex Court complaining that the alleged settlement was under the guise of threat and coercion by respondent No.2 and it is not entered into by the appellant therein with her free will and consent. By referring to the said contention and also by considering the fact that the appellant (victim) disputed the very settlement and challenged the order passed by the High Court of Gujarat quashing the FIR by exercising its power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., the Hon'ble Apex Court held that it was not proper for the High Court to interfere with investigation and quash the FIR by invoking the jurisdiction under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. It was also held in the said judgment that there are various contentious issues and factual aspects to be investigated by the Investigating Officer. 13. In view of the above said authoritative pronouncements and settled legal position, coming to the case on hand, on perusal of the complaint it would reveal the following aspects: KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 8 a) The petitioner and de facto complainant were working in Sri Chaitanya Junior College, Bowrampet Branch as Dean and Senior Lecturer respectively; b) On 02.10.2019 between 2.00 and 4.30 p.m., the petitioner called the de facto complainant to talk casually and believing the same, she went there and the accused sexually abused and raped her in the Car; c) The de facto complainant has lodged the complaint after elapse of one year and one month i.e., 02.03.2020; d) The complainant tried to explain the said delay in lodging the complaint stating that she was heart patient and in need of job, she kept quiet. Thereafter, the petitioner herein created a condition and circumstance that made her to resign the job. Under the said circumstances, she has brought the said fact of rape and sexual assault on her by the petitioner to the Higher Authorities, more particularly, to the notice of Mr. Ravi Kumar, AGM of Sri Chaitanya College, but the same is of no use; and e) There is no resistance from respondent No.2 and on the other hand, on her own volition she went to Gandi Maisamma Cross Road upon receipt of call from the petitioner. It appears after starting the disputes between her and the petitioner, she appears to have lodged the complaint. KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 9 14. The above said aspects would reveal that there was abnormal delay of one year and one month in lodging the complaint by the de facto complainant. She went to Gandi Maisamma Cross Road on her own. The allegation against the petitioner herein is that he has sexually abused and raped her. He has continued the torture and threatened her not to reveal the same. She bring heart patient and in need of job, she kept quiet. 15. It is trite to note that the de facto complainant has been working as Senior Lecturer and, thus, she is a highly qualified woman. She has kept quiet for one year and one month from the date of alleged incident. The contents of complaint dated 02.03.2020 are also vague in nature and there are no specific instances. Thereafter, the de facto complainant herself filed an affidavit in support of I.A. No.2 of 2020 in Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 stating that on the advice of elders and well-wishers, she has settled the matter with the petitioner. She does not want to continue the present proceedings in Crime No.186 of 2020 and, therefore, she sought to permit her to record compromise and to compound the offence. 16. The de facto complainant has also filed joint memo signed by her along with petitioner and their counsel. Pursuant to the order passed by this Court, she has appeared before the Registrar (Judicial - I) of this Court for identification. Even during the said identification, she has stated before the Registrar (Judicial - I) that she has approached this Court for recording compromise. She has identified KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 10 her signature on the joint memo. She has filed her identity viz., Aadhar Card. The affidavit as well as the joint memo is placed on record. 17. At the cost of repetition, as stated above, the de facto complainant is highly qualified woman and she has been working as a Senior Lecturer in Sri Chaitanya Junior College. She has filed the affidavit and the joint memo. She appeared before the Registrar (Judicial - I) of this Court for identification wherein she has stated on her own volition that she is willing to compromise the matter. The facts of the present case are altogether different to the facts of the case in XYZ10. In the said case, the victim has disputed the very settlement itself and she has approached the Hon'ble Supreme Court challenging the orders passed by the High Court of Gujarat quashing the proceedings in the FIR for the offences under Sections 376 , 499 and 506 (2) of IPC. Whereas, in the present case, there is no dispute from the de facto complainant and she has filed the affidavit and joint memo on her own volition and admitted the same before the Registrar (Judicial - I) during her identification. According to this Court, the facts of the present case are akin to the facts of the case in Pramod Suryabhan Pawar5, and the present case is an exception referred to in Bhajan Lal6, more particularly, exception No.5. 19. In view of the above principle laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and considering the facts of the case on hand, this Court is having power to compound the offences which are not KL,J Crl.P. No.3374 of 2020 11 compoundable and quash the proceedings by invoking inherent power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. Accordingly, I.A. Nos.2 and 3 of 2020 are allowed. Consequently, the Criminal Petition is allowed and the proceedings in Crime No.186 of 2020, pending on the file of the Dundigal Police Station are hereby quashed against the petitioner - accused. As a sequel, miscellaneous petitions, if any, pending in the Criminal Petition, shall stand closed. _________________ K. LAKSHMAN, J 20th October, 2020 Mgr