3.Title State vs . Islamuddin & Others on 14 February, 2014 THE COURT OF MS NEHA PALIWAL : METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-03, EAST KARKARDOOMA COURTS : DELHI 1. FIR No. 299/2010 2.Unique Case ID No. 02401R0247932010 3.Title State Vs. Islamuddin & Others 3(A).Name of complainant Kripal Singh, S/o Sh. Ram Swarup, R/o C-7/10, Mandawali, Unnche Par, Delhi. 3(B).Name of accused 1) Islamuddin, S/o Sh. Nizamuddin, R/o C-6/11, Mandawali Unchhe Par, Delhi. 2) Abid, S/o Islamuddin, R/o C-6/11, Mandawali Unchhe Par, Delhi. 3) Sahjaha, W/o Sh. Islamuddin, R/o C-6/11, Mandawali Unchhe Par, Delhi. 4.Date of institution of challan 01/09/10 5.Date of Reserving judgment 28.01.2014 6.Date of pronouncement 14.02.2014 7.Date of commission of offence 10/06/10 8.Offence complained of Under Section 323 / 341 / 34 IPC 9.Offence charged with Under Section 323 / 341 / 34 IPC 10.Plea of the accused Pleaded not guilty 11.Final order Accused Shajahan acquitted for offence U/s 323/341 IPC and accused Islamuddin and Abid are acquitted for the offence 341 IPC and are convicted for the offence U/s 323 IPC . BRIEF REASONS FOR THE DECISION OF THE CASE:- 1. The case of the prosecution in a narrow compass is that on 10.6.2010, at about 12.40pm, at in front of H.No. C-7/10, Mandawali Unnchepar, Mandawali all three accused in furtherance of their common intention wrongfully restrained the complainant Kripal Singh, S/o Sh. Ram Swarup from proceeding in a direction in which he had a right to proceed. It is further the case that the accused FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 1 of 12 persons also voluntarily caused simple hurt with blunt object to the complainant. Thus it is the case that they have committed the offence punishable u/s 323 / 341 / 34 IPC. 2. The Charge sheet was filed in the court on 1.9.2010 and after compliance of Section 207 Cr.P.C. and after hearing parties, notice for the offence punishable u/s 323 / 341 / 34 IPC was framed on 7.2.2011, against all the accused persons to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 3. Prosecution in order to prove its case against the accused persons in total has examined as many as 8 witnesses i.e. PW-1 Kripal Singh (Complainant), PW2 Dr. Jugal K. Goyal, PW3 Dr. B.D. Singh, PW4 Ct. Yashpal Singh, PW5 Ct. Banwari Lal, PW-6 HC Satbir, PW-7 ASI Ram Pal Singh and PW-8 HC Pawan. 4. PW-1 Kripal Singh is the complainant. He has deposed that around 5-6 months prior to the date of his deposition accused Abid was sitting in front of his house alongwith his associates on the stairs entering into the house and when his wife objected to the same there was heated exchange of words and on hearing the same he came out of the house and started talking to the associates of Abid and when he was talking, Abid struck stick blow on his head from the back side and by that time parents of Abid also came on the spot and accused Abid gave stick blow on his head on the instigation of his father. The witness identified the father of accused Abid also before the court. 5. It was further deposed by the witness that mother of the accused was also present when Abid give stick blow on his head. The witness correctly identified the mother of accused before the court. It was further deposed by the witness that as a result of the blow he sustained injuries and blood started coming out from his head and he fainted and his wife might have called the police who in turn took him to LBS Hospital. 6. It was further deposed by the witness that his statement was recorded by the police at the police station which is Ex. PW-1/A FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 2 of 12 bearing his signatures at point A. It was further deposed that he has shown the place of incident to the police and had received 12 stitches on his head and injury on his right hand and in the carpels of his right hand. The witness had brought the treatment papers before the court and exhibited the same as Ex. PW-1/D and has deposed that he has lodged the complaint on the next day of the incident. It was further deposed that there was some sharp object which might be attached with the stick with which he was given the blow. 7. The witness was cross examined by Ld. APP for State with the permission of court wherein it was deposed by the witness that portion Mark A to A-1 in Ex. PW-1/A is not the correct version of the facts narrated by him to the police. It was admitted by the witness that the date of the incident was 10.6.2010 at about 12.00-12.30pm. 8. The witness was cross examined by the Ld. Counsel for accused, wherein it was deposed by the witness that the police had not read over the statement to him before obtaining his signatures and has not even seized his blood stained clothes. It was further deposed by the witness that he was discharged on the same date after about 5-6 hours from the hospital. It was further deposed by the witness that he does not remember as to whether he has stated to the police about the stitches received from the incident. 9. PW-2 Dr. Jugal K. Goyal, has deposed before the court that he could not give any opinion upon the MLC of the injured/complainant as no surgical treatment papers were available alongwith MLC and he had recorded his observation on the MLC which is Ex. PW-2/A bearing his signatures at point A. Despite opportunity the said witness was not cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons. 10. PW-3, Dr. B.D. Singh, has deposed that on 10.6.2010, he had examined Kripal, S/o Sh. Ram Swarup, vide MLC No. 6924/10 with alleged history of assault and MLC is already exhibited as Ex. PW-2/A bearing his signatures at point B. FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 3 of 12 11. PW-4 Ct. Yashpal Singh has deposed that on 10.6.2010, on receipt of PCR call he alongwith HC Pawan reached at the spot where they came to know that injured had already been taken to LBS Hospital and thereafter, they went to the hospital and met with injured who stated that he was not in the position to give statement and therefore the call was kept pending. 12. In his cross examination it was stated by the witness that no document was prepared by the IO in his presence. 13. PW-5 Ct. Banwari Lal has deposed that on 11.6.2010, IO gave him the complaint which he gave to the Duty Officer and thereafter, the Duty Officer registered the case and gave the copy of FIR and rukka to him, which he handed over to the IO at the spot. It was further deposed that thereafter IO searched the accused persons and all the three accused persons were arrested and their personal search was conducted vide memos Ex. PW-5/A to Ex. PW-5/F bearing the signatures of the witness at point A and thereafter, they were released on bail and the statement of the witness was recorded by the IO. 14. PW-6 HC Satbir has deposed that on 10.6.2010, he was posted at PCR as Incharge and at about 12.30pm, he received a call regarding quarrel and went to the spot at E-7/10 Mandawali Masjid, where he met the injured and took him in his PCR van and admitted him in Hospital and the doctor prepared the MLC. Thereafter, IO recorded his statement. 15. The witness was cross examined by Ld. Counsel for accused wherein it was deposed by the witness that he reached the spot within 5 minutes and after taking the injured they reached the hospital after about 15 minutes. 16. PW-7 ASI Rampal Singh is the Duty Officer and has proved before the court the registration of FIR Ex. PW-7/A and rukka Ex. PW-7/B. 17. PW-8 HC Pawan is the IO of the present matter and has FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 4 of 12 deposed that on 10.6.2010, on receipt of DD No.23 A, he alongwith Ct. Satpal went to the spot from where he came to know that PCR Van has already taken the injured to LBS Hospital and when he alongwith Ct. Satpal went to LBS Hospital they met the injured, however, the injured stated that he would make the statement later on after consulting his family members. 18. It was further deposed by the witness that on the next date the complainant himself came to the PS and got his statement recorded to him and thereafter he prepared rukka and gave the same to duty officer and alongwith the complainant went to the spot and prepared the site plan at the instance of the complainant Ex. PW-8/B bearing the signatures of the witness at point A. It was further deposed by the witness that the complainant showed him the house of the accused persons and the accused persons were arrested vide memo Ex. PW-5/A to Ex. PW-5/C and their personal search was conducted vide memos Ex. PW-5/D to Ex. PW-5/F all bearing the signature of witness at point B and thereafter all the accused persons were released on bail. The witness correctly identified all the accused persons present before the court. 19. It was further deposed by the witness that he submitted the MLC for result and in the absence of treatment card no opinion was given by the doctor and though he requested the complainant to give the same, the complainant stated that the same has been misplaced. It was further deposed by the witness that after completion of investigation he has prepared the charge sheet and has sent the same before the court for trial. 20. The witness was cross examined by Ld. Counsel for accused persons, wherein it was deposed by him that he had interrogated 3-4 persons at the spot and reached the hospital at about 1.00pm. It was further deposed that no family member of the injured were present at the hospital when he reached the hospital. It was further deposed that he has not seized the blood stained clothes of the complainant. FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 5 of 12 It was further deposed by the witness that the accused persons were arrested from their house. 21. As no other prosecution witness was examined in the present case, the prosecution evidence was closed in the present matter vide order of the court dated 28.9.2013. 22. Thereafter, all the accused persons were examined U/s 313 Cr.P.C . read with Section 281 Cr.P.C. by the court on 29.11.2013 wherein all of them have stated in their statement that they were not present at the spot and it was stated by accused Shahjahan that she had went to do her job at Navneeti Apartment and it was stated by accused Islamuddin that he had gone to Sadar Bazar to purchase plastic articles and it was submitted by accused Abid that he was present at his saloon at the time of this incident. It was further submitted by the accused persons that they have been falsely implicated in the present matter due to an altercation between the complainant and their youngest son and the younger brother of accused Abid 2-3 days prior to the date of alleged incident. As it was submitted by them that they do not wish to lead any evidence in their defence the matter was fixed for final arguments. 23. I have heard the Ld. APP for the state, Ld. counsel for the accused persons and perused the entire material available on record. 24. It is a settled legal principle that the prosecution has to prove its case beyond the shadow of all reasonable doubts and has to stand upon its own legs. The prosecution cannot draw any strength from the weakness of the case of the accused. It is also a settled proposition in the criminal law that the accused had a pious right of not to be convicted for an offence which is not established beyond reasonable doubts by the prosecution. The burden of proof in a criminal trial always rest upon the prosecution and the same never shifts on accused. 25. Here it would be appropriate to refer the case law reported FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 6 of 12 as " Sadhu Singh Vs. State of Punjab " 1997 (3) Crime 55 the Punjab & Haryana High Court wherein it was observed as under:- " In a criminal trial, it is for the prosecution to establish its case beyond all reasonable doubts. It is for the prosecution to travel the entire distance from 'may have' to 'must have'. If the prosecution appears to be improbable or lacks credibility the benefit of doubt necessarily has to go to the accused". 26. Now by applying the aforesaid legal propositions of law to the factual matrix of the present case, let us see as to what extent the prosecution has been able to prove its case against accused persons. 27. The accused persons in the present case have been charged for the offence punishable U/s 323, 341 and 34 IPC . 28. In order to constitute the offence U/s 341 IPC it has to be proved before the court that any person has been wrongfully restrained. Wrongful restraint has been defined U/s 339 IPC as per which the necessary ingredients for the constitution of that offence are voluntarily obstructing any person in order to prevent that person from proceeding in any direction in which the person has a right to proceed. Section 341 is the section providing punishment for wrongful restraint. 29. In the present matter the complainant has deposed before the court at the stage of his cross examination that police has not read over his statement to him before obtaining his signatures and the portion from A to A- in Ex. PW-1/A is not the correct version which was stated by him to the police. It was submitted by the complainant that what he is deposing before the court is the correct version. 30. In the entire testimony of the complainant there is no whisper of restraint. The complainant has nowhere deposed that any of the accused persons has obstructed his way in order to prevent him from proceeding in any direction. All other witnesses are witnesses of FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 7 of 12 investigation and therefore the ingredients for the constitution of the offence U/s 339 IPC are not established before the court. 31. In view of the same all the accused persons are acquitted for the offence U/s 339 IPC punishable U/s 341 IPC . 32. Besides the offence U/s 341 IPC accused persons are charged for the offence U/s 323 IPC . Section 323 IPC provides for the punishment of voluntarily causing hurt. Thus in order to prove the offence punishable U/s 323 read with Section 34 IPC the prosecution has to prove before the court that the accused persons have voluntarily caused hurt to the complainant/injured in furtherance of their common intention. Section 321 IPC defines as to what constitutes voluntarily causing hurt. 33. Section 321 IPC states as under:. "Voluntarily causing hurt:- whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does thereby cause hurt to any person, is said "voluntarily cause hurt". 34. Thus the essential Ingredients in order to constitute the offence of voluntarily causing hurt are as under:- (a) A person does any act:- (i) with intention of thereby causing hurt to any person or, (ii) with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person. (b) He thereby causes hurt to any person. 35. Thus the prosecution has to prove that the accused persons have caused hurt to the complainant/injured with the intention of causing hurt and have thereby caused hurt to the said person and the said act was done by them voluntarily in furtherance of their common FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 8 of 12 intention. Thus both the existence of physical as well as mental element in the commission of the offence have to be proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. 36. In the present case in hand the complainant/injured has appeared in the witness box and had categorically identified accused Abid as the person who has struck stick blow on his head from the back side. He has also deposed that on the instigation of accused Islamuddin accused Abid gave another stick blow on his head. 37. Common intention could be formed at the spot of occurrence as well and the leading feature of the same is the element of participation in action. Section 34 IPC is a rule of evidence and all the persons are deemed guilty even if act is done by one of them as the presence of accomplice gives encouragement, support & protection to the person actually committing the act. 38. In the present matter deposition of the complainant is attributing an overt act of instigation on part of accused Islamuddin. However, with respect to accused Shahjahan, it is only deposed by the complainant before the court that she was also present at the spot when accused Abid gave stick blow on his head. In order to attract the provision of Section 34 viz a viz accused Shahjahan it has to be established that there was a common intention to inflict hurt upon the complainant. The same has to be inferred from the act or conduct or other relevant circumstances of the case in hand. Besides the presence of accused Shahjahan at the spot there is nothing else which is incriminating against her on record. Though common intention may develop on the spot between a number of persons with reference to facts and circumstances of situation, however, it must be anterior in point of time to the commission of the crime, showing a pre-arranged plan and prior concert. The said common intention is not established viz a viz accused Shahjahan, as mere presence is attributed to her in the deposition of the PW. Thus accused Shahjahan is acquitted for the offence U/s 323/34 IPC . FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 9 of 12 39. In the present case besides the complainant the doctor who has prepare the MLC, has also been examined as a witness. PW-3 has proved before the court the execution of MLC bearing no.6924/10. Perusal of the MLC Ex. PW-2/A reveals that the complainant was examined on 10.6.2010 with alleged history of assault and had received injuries of the nature of clear lacerated wounds in scalp coupled with bleeding, abrasion on nail and little finger and clear lacerated wound in the web of right hand middle and index finger and abrasion on left elbow. It was deposed by PW-2 that he could not give any opinion on the MLC as no surgical treatment papers were available. PW-8 has deposed that in the absence of treatment card no opinion was given by the doctor and though he requested the complainant to give the same but it was stated by the complainant that the same has been misplaced. 40. The complainant has deposed before the court that he has received 12 stitches on his head and has received injury on his right hand and has also received stitches in the carpals of his right hand. The complainant at the time of his deposition brought his treatment papers Ex. PW-1/D. Perusal of the treatment papers also show the existence of lacerated wound on scalp, right hand and little finger. However, mere perusal of the same does not reveal as to whether the injury is simple or grievous. However, the nature of wound is lacerated. 41. The deposition of PW's coupled with the fact that the MLC is showing that the complainant was admitted on 10.6.2010 at 1.20pm and the deposition of PW's 4 and 5 that they have reached the spot at around 10.30 to 11.30/12.00 to 1.00 and the categorical deposition of PW-6 that at about 12.30 he had received a PCR call, clearly establish before the court that hurt was caused to complainant in the present matter. MLC is also proved before the court as the testimony of PW-3 has remained unrebutted and PW-3 is not even cross examined by Ld. Counsel for accused. The law is well settled that if a FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 10 of 12 witness is not cross examined on a particular issue by the opposite party, the evidence of the witness ought to be accepted. 42. Thus proximity in the time of PCR call, time of MLC coupled with the specific and categorical deposition of the complainant established before the court beyond reasonable doubt that hurt was caused to the complainant. Complainant has specifically named accused Abid as the person who has inflicted blows upon him and that he has done so at the instigation of accused Islamuddin. 43. Though it is deposed by the complainant that he has received injuries from some sharp object which might be attached with the stick. However, the wounds as mentioned in MLC and treatment papers are lacerated in nature. 44. Keeping in view the above said discussions and findings and depositions, the prosecution has been able to prove that the accused Abid and Islamuddin in furtherance of their common intention have caused hurt to complainant Kripal Singh with the intention of causing hurt and have thereby caused hurt and the said act was done by them voluntarily. Thus both the existence of physical as well as mental element in the commission of the offence has been proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt against accused Abid and Islamuddin. 45. However, nothing incriminating had come on record against accused Shahjahan and further more no ingredient of the offence of wrongful restraint is established against any of the accused person. 46. In view of the same accused Shahjahan is acquitted for the offences punishable U/s 323/341/34 IPC . 47. Accused Islamuddin and Abid are acquitted for the offence U/s 341/34 IPC . However, they are convicted for the offence U/s 323/34 IPC . 48. Thus the accused persons namely Abid and Islamuddin are convicted of the offence U/s 321 IPC punishable U/s 323 IPC read with 34 IPC . FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 11 of 12 49. Convicts be heard separately on the quantum of sentence. 50. Copy of judgment be supplied to the convicts free of cost. Announced in the (Neha Paliwal) Open Court on 14.2.2014 MM-03 (E)/KKD,Delhi It is certified that this judgment contains 12 pages and each page bears my signature. (Neha Paliwal) MM-03 (E)/KKD:Delhi/14.2.2014 FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 12 of 12 FIR No. 299/2010 State Vs Islamuddin & Others 13 of 12