Sri P O Shivakumar vs The State Of Karnataka on 7 August, 2024 Author: M.Nagaprasanna Bench: M.Nagaprasanna 1 Reserved on : 29.05.2024 Pronounced on : 07.08.2024 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU DATED THIS THE 07TH DAY OF AUGUST, 2024 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA CRIMINAL PETITION No.13575 OF 2023 BETWEEN: 1 . SRI. P.O.SHIVAKUMAR S/O P.OMKARA MURTHY AGED ABOUT 64 YEARS R/AT C-57, OMKAR B., 2ND PARALLEL ROAD, 'B' BLOCK GANDHINAGARA SHIVAMOGGA - 577 202. 2 . SHAMANTH P. S., S/O SRI. P.O.SHIVAKUMAR AGED ABOUT 24 YEARS R/AT C-57, OMKARA 2ND PARALLEL ROAD 'B' BLOCK GANDHINAGARA SHIVAMOGGA - 577 202. 3 . SHRUTHASENA D. Y., S/O SRI. YADAVA D. S., AGED ABOUT 23 YEARS R/O DURGADAHALLI, SUNKASALA CHIKKAMAGALURU - 577 121. 2 4 . SRI. ASHOK KUMAR D. S., S/O D.N.SIDDAPPA AGED ABOUT 65 YEARS R/AT NO.181/A, NTI LAYOUT RAJEEV GANDHI NAGAR KODIGE HALLI POST SAHAKAR NAGARA, BENGALURU. ... PETITIONERS (BY SRI. K.N.PHANINDRA, SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR SRI. SRIKANTH PATIL K., ADVOCATE) AND: 1. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA BY PUTTENAHALLI POLICE STATION BENGALURU, NOW REPRESENTED BY STATE PP, HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA BUILDING, BENGALURU - 560 001. 2. SRI. C.N.DHARANISH S/O C.S.NARASIMHAIAH AGED ABOUT 49 YEARS R/AT. NO.70, C-1, 2ND MAIN DOLLARS COLONY, MAHARAJA ENCLAVE, J.P.NAGARA, IV PHASE BENGALURU - 560 078. ... RESPONDENTS (BY SRI. THEJESH P., HCGP FOR R1; SRI. C.N.DHARANISH, PARTY-IN-PERSON R2) THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 482 OF CR.P.C., PRAYING TO QUASH THE PRIVATE COMPLAINT DATED 03.10.2023 AND ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS IN PCR.NO.11401/2023 PENDING ON THE FILE OF XXX A.C.M.M BENGALURU (ANNEXURE- A-1 AND A2) FIR IN CR.NO.349/2023 FILED BY THE 1ST RESPONDENT POLICE PUTTENAHHALLI P.S. FOR THE OFFENCE 3 P/U/S 120B, 182, 191, 192, 193, 211 R/W 34 OF IPC (ANNEXURE- A). THIS CRIMINAL PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 29.05.2024 COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:- CORAM: THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA CAV ORDER The petitioners are before this Court calling in question registration of a crime in Crime No.349 of 2023 for offences punishable under Sections 120B , 182 , 191 , 192 , 193 , 211 and 34 of the IPC arising out of P.C.R.No.11401 of 2023 pending before the XXX Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengaluru. 2. Heard Sri K.N. Phanindra, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners, Sri P. Thejesh, learned High Court Government appearing for respondent No.1 and Sri C.N. Dharanish, respondent No.2/party-in-person. 3. The facts in brief, germane, are as follows:- The 2nd respondent is the complainant, a practicing Advocate. The petitioners are arrayed as accused. The genesis of the problem is not with the act of the petitioners. One Abhay H files a complaint 4 against the 2nd respondent which becomes a crime in Crime No.282 of 2021 on 20-12-2021 for offences punishable under Sections 504 , 506 and 34 of the IPC and Section 3(1)(r) and 3(1)(s) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2015 ('the Act' for short). The Police after investigation file a 'B' report. The 'B' report comes to be accepted and the proceedings closed against the complainant. 4. On 03-10-2023 the complainant registers a private complaint against the petitioners in P.C.R. No.11401 of 2023. On 04-11-2023 the learned Magistrate exercising power under Section 156(3) of the CrPC refers the matter for investigation to the jurisdictional police. The Police then register a crime in Crime No.349 of 2023 for the aforementioned offences. The moment a crime is registered, the petitioners have knocked at the doors of this Court in the subject petition. This Court, in terms of its order dated 21-12-2023, has stayed further investigation qua the petitioners. With the consent of parties, the matter is taken up for its final disposal. 5 5. The learned senior counsel Sri K.N.Phanindra takes this Court through the documents appended to the petition to demonstrate that the petitioners have never registered any complaint against the 2nd respondent. They have no transaction with the 2nd respondent. It is one Abhay, accused No.1 has registered the crime which ends up in a 'B' report. It is his submission that the offences mentioned hereinabove would not even attract any offence qua the petitioners. Therefore, there is no question of these petitioners giving false evidence before the Court. He would further contend that if it is the offence under Section 193 of the IPC, the crime must be registered by person authorized by the Court. The 'B' report so filed in favour of the petitioners was on verification of CCTV footage and there is no indication in the entire report that there was any involvement of these petitioners in furnishing any false information to the Police. It is his further submission that the role played by these petitioners is not even indicated to be an offence under Section 120B of the IPC at the time when they tendered their evidence in the case against the complainant. Seemingly a civil dispute is converted into a criminal 6 case. Therefore, his submission is that further investigation should not be permitted, for it to become an abuse of the process of law. 6. Per contra, the 2nd respondent appearing in person would vehemently contend that 'B' report was filed after thorough investigation in Crime No.282 of 2021. During the investigation it was found that the 1st petitioner, a Police Officer was caught red handed in the CCTV footage trying to fabricate a false atrocities case against the complainant which formed part of 'B' report. Therefore, the tampering of evidence, as could be gathered from the CCTV footage, would clearly attract the offences alleged against these petitioners. It is not today, but the 1st petitioner has an axe to grind against the complainant, as both of them reside in the same apartment complex and the 1st petitioner being a Police Officer has repeatedly harassed the complainant and his family. He would submit that it is a matter of trial for the petitioners to come out clean, in the teeth of ingredients of Section 195 of the CrPC being clearly met in the case at hand which would lead to the offences so alleged. He would seek dismissal of the petition. 7 7. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the learned senior counsel, learned High Court Government Pleader and the 2nd respondent in-person and have perused the material on record. 8. The 2nd respondent, a practicing Advocate is a de-facto complainant. He has appeared in person in these proceedings. A little walk in the history would be necessary to draw certain inference on the complaint filed by Sri H. Abhay and the Police filing a 'B' report. The complainant is a resident of flat No.C-1 in Maharaja Enclave Apartment at Dollars Colony, J.P.Nagar IV Phase, Bangalore. It is the case of the 1st petitioner that his father Sri P. Omkara Murthy had been allotted a site in Site No.70 formed in Sy.No.19 of Dollars Colony by the Bangalore Development Authority '(BDA' for short) in terms of a lease cum sale agreement. On the death of his father, the 1st petitioner becomes owner of the said site. The BDA had executed a registered sale deed in favour of the 1st petitioner thereto. On 12-08-2005 the 1st petitioner enters into a Joint Development Agreement with M/s Maharaja Developers who sought to construct an apartment complex. In terms of the 8 agreement, the 1st petitioner got 3 flats and a pent house. It is the case of the complainant that he owns only two flats as per the approved plan and a small room of 200 sq. ft. in a terrace which was accordingly constructed by the builder and handed over to the 1st petitioner. The 1st petitioner has illegally constructed two more flats above the flat of the complainant during which time heavy damage was caused to the flat of the 2nd respondent. This happened in the year 2008. It is from that point the dispute began to brew between the 1st petitioner and the complainant. 9. It is the case of the petitioners that the complainant had purchased Flat No.70/4 from the developer and since then the complainant has been troubling the tenants and other flat mates by filing several complaints alleging that the building was constructed in violation of the sanctioned plan. Disputes galore between the two, which would reach the Karnataka Appellate Tribunal and this Court, in several writ petitions challenging the action of the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike ('BBMP' for short) or the action of the complainant seeking to initiate proceedings against the petitioners. The issue leads up to orders being passed for demolition under 9 Section 462 of the Karnataka Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 for the illegally constructed flats which according to the complainant was suppressed from the Court when he secures an order. The disputes then would become the foundation of a complaint registered by H.Abhay against the complainant for offences punishable under the Act. The private complaint so filed was referred to investigation and on reference, the Police register crime in Crime No.282 of 2021 for offences punishable under Sections 504 , 506 and 34 of the IPC and Section 3(1)(r) and 3(1)(s) of the Act. The Police after investigation for 10 months file a 'B' report. After filing of 'B' report by the Police in the complaint preferred by H.Abhay, the complainant/2nd respondent files a private complaint on 03.10.2023 invoking Section 200 of the CrPC before the learned Magistrate against these petitioners. Since the entire issue is now springs from the complaint, it is germane to notice certain paragraphs of the private complaint. They read as follows: "16) The accused No.4 D.S.Ahok Kumar who scripted the entire fabricated story (in a filmy/movie style) of the crime incident never turned up to the I/O for investigation even after repeated notices issued by the I/O. 17) The main kingpin accused No.5 P.O. Shivakumar has been clearly caught red handed along with the other accused in the 10 CCTV Footage monitoring the entire saga of the false, fabricated and vexatious story of the crime incident of the false and fabricated heinous atrocity case near the complainant's apartment. 18) Had the complainant not acted swiftly and secured the CTTV FOOTAGE of his apartment and the street junction and sent it to the I/O, the accused herein would have ruined the complainant's entire family and their life, eternally. 19) The accused by this have together with common intention with criminal conspiracy and malicious intention to wreak vengeance have committed the following offences: I. Together knowingly and intentionally misused and abused the process of law with common intention, with criminal conspiracy and malicious intention to wreak vengeance against the complainant and his wife. II. Together orchestrated BIG STORY of vexatious, false and fabricated crime story of the false atrocity crime incident. III. Together filed heinous false, fabricated and vexatious atrocity complaint/case in crime #282/2021 of Puttenahalli-Police against the complainant and his wife on 20th DEC 2021. IV. Together given fabricated false evidence to the I/O (video-graphed and submitted to Hon'ble CCH-71 with "B REPORT"). V. And also together intentionally injured the complainant and his wife in body, reputation and mind and also lowered them in front of the society. This is one of the rarest of the rare criminal case where in each and every accused are caught red handed having committed the above mentioned criminal offences and also with clinching documentary and CCTV footage evidence already available on the file of Crime No.282 of 2021 of Puttenahalli-PS before the Hon'ble Sessions Court CCH-71. 11 Unless the necessary deterrent legal action is taken against the culprits like these and punished in accordance with the larger interest of society, who misuse and abuse the process of law and also misuse and abuse the law meant to protect the SC/ST community, the SOCIETY and INNOCENT PEOPLE WHO ARE VICTIMS OF THESE CULPRITS WILL SUFFER FOR EVER. 20) Regarding the offence of the criminal conspiracy committed by the accused u/ sec.120B of IPC the criminal conspiracy of the accused was to fix the complainant and his wife with the following offences in the crime No.282 of 2021 of Puttenahalli Police: * Section 3(1)(r) and Section 3(1)(s) of the SC & ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2015. * Section 504 and Section 506 r/w Section 34 of IPC. 21) The offences under Section 3(1)(r) and Section 3(1)(s) of the SC & ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2015 is COGNIZABLE and also NON-BAILABLE OFFENCE and triable by the Hon'ble COURT OF SESSIONS; Regarding the offences under Section 504 and Section 506 r/w Section 34 of IPC, punishment is 2 years and hence the offence of criminal conspiracy under Section 120(B) of IPC is clearly attracted against these accused and becomes cognizable and non-bailable in nature. 22) The complainant has exhausted the remedies available to register the cognizable criminal case against the accused persons before approaching this Hon'ble Court. 23) The complainant has complied the requirements as prescribed in the law or in the precedents of the Hon'ble Apex Court of India and also filed necessary affidavit on oath complying in accordance with law/procedures. Hence, the complainant is before this Hon'ble Court with this complaint. 24) After perusing the complete CCTV FOOTAGE and other documents, the detailed 'B-Report' and evidence available on record before the Hon'ble CCH-71 in crime number 282 of 2021, the offences committed by the accused persons are punishable 12 under Section 120-B, 182, 191, 192, 193, 211, 499, 500 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code. a) OF FALSE EVIDENCE AND OFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE IPC Section 182 - False information, with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to the injury of another person. The accused have given false information to the Police to use his lawful power to injury of the complainant and his wife. b) IPC Section 191 - Giving false evidence - A false statement as to the belief of the person attesting is within the meaning of this section, and a person may be guilty of giving false evidence by stating that he believes a thing which he does not believe, as well as by stating that he knows a thing which he does not know. The accused have knowingly and intentionally given false evidence, even though they knew that it was false. c) IPC Section 192 - Fabricating false evidence:- Whoever causes any circumstance to exist or makes any false entry in any book or record, or makes any document containing a false statement, intending that such circumstance, false entry or false statement may appear in evidence in a judicial proceeding, or in a proceeding taken by law before a public servant as such, or before an arbitrator, and that such circumstance, false entry or false statement, so appearing in evidence, may cause any person who in such proceeding is to form an opinion upon the evidence, to entertain an erroneous opinion touching any point material to the result of such proceeding, is said "to fabricate false evidence". The accused have together with criminal conspiracy and common intention have created the circumstance of the crime of the alleged offences of the false and fabricated atrocity case. d) IPC Section 193 - Punishment for false evidence:--Whoever intentionally gives false evidence at any stage of a judicial proceeding, or fabricates false evidence for the purpose of being used in any stage of a judicial proceeding, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term 13 which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine; and whoever intentionally gives or fabricates false evidence in any other case, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine. The accused have together with criminal common intention have given false evidence in the crime of the false and fabricated atrocity case. e) IPC Section 211 - False charge of offence made with intent to injure: Whoever, with intent to cause injury to any person, institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal proceeding against that person, or falsely charges any person with having committed an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding or charge against that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; The accused have together with criminal conspiracy and common intention to injure, have made false charge of offence against the complainant and his wife in the crime of the false and fabricated atrocity case. f) IPC Section 499 - Defamation:--Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. The accused have together with criminal conspiracy and common intention to harm the complainant and his wife have caused the said heinous false and fabricated atrocity case without any probable cause have defamed and lowered them in front of the society. g) IPC Section 500 - Punishment for defamation:--Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 14 The accused have together with criminal conspiracy and common intention have injured and defamed the complainant and his wife and lowered them in front of the society by instituting the heinous false and fabricated atrocity case against them, without any probable cause. h) IPC Section 34 - Acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention:-- When a criminal act is done by several persons, in furtherance of the common intention of all, each of such person is liable for that act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone. The accused have together with criminal conspiracy have committed the above mentioned offences in furtherance of common intention to wreak vengeance against the complainant and his wife. 25) The complainant submits that he has not filed any other complaint before any other court of law except this complaint before this Hon'ble Court, regarding this cause of action. 26) The offences committed by the accused is within the jurisdiction of Puttenahalli-Police, Bangalore and is within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court. 27) The complainant has approached the jurisdictional Puttenahalli Police and jurisdictional DCP (South) and other higher police authorities before approaching this Hon'ble Court." 28) The complainant has approached the jurisdictional Puttenahalli police at the first instance, secondly the jurisdictional DCP(south) and thirdly the other higher police authorities, but none of them have initiated legal action against the accused in accordance with law. PRAYER Wherefore, the complainant humbly and most respectfully prays that this Hon'ble Court be pleased to; (a) Refer this complaint to jurisdictional Puttenahalli Police under section 156(3) of Cr.P.C to register the criminal case/FIR 15 against the accused under section 120-B, 182, 191, 192, 193, 211, 499, 500 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code. (b) Direct the Inspector of Police- Puttenahalli Police station, to investigate the complaint and submit the final report to this hon'ble court, (c) Pass such other order/s in favour of the complaint deemed fit by this hon'ble court in the facts and circumstances of this case/complaint." The said private complaint becomes a crime in Crime No.349 of 2023. The offences alleged are under Sections 120B , 182 , 191 , 192 , 193 , 211 and 34 of the IPC. The broad contents of the complaint as noticed hereinabove, are that the 1st petitioner/ accused No.5 is a retired Police Officer and having influence in the Police Department has repeatedly harassed the complainant and his family by filing false cases to wreak vengeance for the act of the complainant in initiating legal proceedings against illegal construction of two flats by the 1st petitioner. The sheet anchor of the submission of the respondent in-person is that accused No.1 H. Abhay belonging to Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe conspired with other accused to file complaint against the complainant and his wife. 16 10. The Investigating Officer investigates into the matter, collects all the evidence and CCTV footage of the apartment building and the BBMP CCTV footage on the street and then files a 'B' report on the score that no incident of hurling any abuse did ever happen as alleged by accused No.1. The Court accepts the 'B' report, after affording opportunity to the complainant therein closes the same. Therefore, it was proved that the allegations levelled against the complainant in Crime No.282 of 2021 were false. These submissions would merit acceptance in the light of CCTV footage rendering corroborative material to ward off the allegations of hurling abuses taking the name of the caste by the complainant. Based upon the said fact emerges the subject complaint. The learned Magistrate, after considering the complaint so filed by the complainant, refers the matter for investigation which becomes a crime in Crime No.349 of 2023 for the afore-quoted offences, subject crime. It is the registration of the crime that is challenged in the case at hand. 11. It becomes germane to notice another analogous proceeding instituted by the complainant against petitioners 1 and 17 2, the father and son which had become the subject matter of Criminal Petition No.6247 of 2019 before this Court. A coordinate Bench of this Court, in the said criminal petition, observing that there was evidence with regard to CCTV footage of the alleged incident, dismisses the criminal petition. The order in the said criminal petition reads as follows: "2. The complaint goes on to state that despite his request, the Police Inspector did not respond to his call and the ACP received his call and informed him that he had instructed the Sub-Inspector of Police to take necessary legal action. It was stated that when the complainant tried to contact the Sub- Inspector of Police, he got a recorded message that he was not reachable after which he followed up on the issue with the control room, who, in turn, sent the Hoysala Police and on their arrival, he and his family members indicated the presence of the 1st petitioner and requested them to take legal action in the light of the proclamation pending against him. 3. It was alleged that the Hoysala Police, instead of taking action against the 1st petitioner, saluted him and let him go and informed the complainant that they could not arrest him. It was alleged that the 1st petitioner thereafter came out of his car and started abusing and yelling at the complainant and his family members using unparliamentary language and also threatened to kill the entire family. 4. It was alleged that the complainant had requested his wife to record the incident on her mobile phone , but immediately thereafter the 1st petitioner went back to his car and ran away from the spot. 5. It was alleged that the complainant had checked the CCTV footage and it was found that the 1st petitioner's on i.e., the 2nd petitioner had damaged the CCTV camera by pulling out 18 the wires. The complainant therefore requested an FIR be registered and action be taken against the petitioners. 6. The Police registered the complaint as a non- cognizable report and thereafter sought permission of the Magistrate to investigate, as contemplated under Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C. The Magistrate accorded permission to the police to investigate, following which the police investigated the matter and laid a chargesheet against the petitioners. 7. Being aggrieved by the initiation of criminal proceedings which has culminated in the charge sheet, the present petition has been filed. 8. Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the entire proceedings is a result of vendetta of the complainant and the complainant, taking advantage of the fact that he was a lawyer, had initiated umpteen proceedings against the petitioners and, therefore, it was a clear case of the complainant abusing the process of law which was required to be nipped at the bud. 9. The complainant, who appears as a party-in-person, however, contended that the allegation that he had lodged a false complaint is absolutely in correct and he contended that during the course of investigation, he had furnished the CCTV footage and the Police, on examining the CCTV footage, had concluded that there were adequate grounds available to prosecute the petitioners and there was therefore no justification for entertaining this petition that has been filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to quash the proceedings. 10. A perusal of the chargesheet indicates that the Police have produced the DVD which contained the CCTV footage of the alleged incident. In my view, having regard to the fact that there is independent material to substantial the allegations of the complainant, the Police were justified in laying the chargesheet. Having regard to the materials on record, in my view, it would not be an appropriate case to invoke the extended jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. to quash the proceedings. The petition is therefore dismissed." 19 In the light of the aforesaid circumstance of dismissal of criminal petition inter alia, finding that the issue in the case at hand projects a maze of facts, interference at the stage of investigation that too on the specious plea that the petitioners had nothing to do with the case against the complainant in Crime No.282 of 2021 cannot be accepted and interfered at this stage. 12. It is also germane to notice that the complainant has submitted 3 DVD with CCTV footage along with an affidavit under Section 65B of the Evidence Act for the purpose of investigation by the Investigating Officer and has also supplied all incriminating materials. These materials were already taken note of by the coordinate Bench when rejecting the criminal petition. Therefore, the issue in the lis forms a maze of facts. It is a dispute which is not purely civil as is projected by the learned senior counsel for the petitioners, but would require investigation in the least. The contention that there is a bar under Section 195 of the CrPC to allege the subject offences that are alleged against the petitioners would also be unacceptable as Section 195 of the CrPC comes into operation at the stage when the Court intends to take cognizance of 20 the offence under the CrPC . It does not deal with statutory power of the Police to investigate into a FIR once it is referred for such investigation. 13. Now it becomes apposite to refer to the judgment of the High Court of Allahabad in the case of VISHWANATH v. STATE OF U.P.1 wherein it is held as follows: ".... .... .... 10. Section 195 (I) (b) bars the Court taking cognizance of an offence, in which, forgery has been committed in a documents filed in case pending in any Civil, Criminal or Revenue Court, if such forgery has been made in any Court proceedings, then the concerned Court should file a complaint as provided under Section 340 Cr. P.C. 11. From the perusal of averments made in the application under Section 156(3) Cr. P.C., it transpires that alleged forgery in affidavit and will deed was not done while they were already been filed in the case pending in different Courts. The alleged false affidavit or forged document were prepared out side the Court and same has been filed in the judicial proceedings in a case pending in a Court. Thus, the bar against taking cognizance of a criminal case is not applicable in the facts and circumstances given in the application under Section 156(3) Cr. P.C. 12. The Hon'ble Apex Court has held in paragraph nos. 7, 8, 9 and 13 of the judgment in Sachida Nand Singh v. State of Bihar, (1998) 2 SCC 493, condition necessary for application of the bar under Section 195(1) (B) Cr. P.C., which is as follows:-- 1 2024 SCC OnLine All 775 21 7. Even if the clause is capable of two interpretations we are inclined to choose the narrower interpretation for obvious reasons. Section 190 of the Code empowers "any magistrate of the first class" to take cognizance of "any offence" upon receiving a complaint, or police report or information or upon his own knowledge. Section 195 restricts such general powers of the magistrate, and the general right of a person to move the court with a complaint is to that extent curtailed. It is a well-recognised canon of interpretation that provision curbing the general jurisdiction of the court must normally receive strict interpretation unless the statute or the context requires otherwise (Abdul Waheed Khan v. Bhawani [AIR 1966 SC 1718 : (1966) 3 SCR 617]). 8. That apart it is difficult to interpret Section 195(1)(b)(ii) as containing a bar against initiation of prosecution proceedings merely because the document concerned was produced in a court albeit the act of forgery was perpetrated prior to its production in the Court. Any such construction is likely to ensue unsavoury consequences. For instance, if rank forgery of a valuable document is detected and the forgerer is sure that he would imminently be embroiled in prosecution proceedings he can simply get that document produced in any long-drawn litigation which was either instituted by himself or somebody else who can be influenced by him and thereby pre-empt the prosecution for the entire long period of pendency of that litigation. It is a settled proposition that if the language of a legislation is capable of more than one interpretation, the one which is capable of causing mischievous consequences should be averted. Quoting from Gill v. Donald Humberstone & Co. Ltd. [[1963] 1 WLR 929 : [1963] 3 All ER 1803] Maxwell has stated in his treatise (Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edn., p. 105) that "if the language is capable of more than one interpretation we ought to discard the more natural meaning if it leads to unreasonable result and adopt that interpretation which leads to a reasonably practicable result". The clause which we are now considering contains enough indication to show that the more natural meaning is that which leans in favour of a strict construction, and hence the aforesaid observation is eminently applicable here. 9. As Section 340(1) of the Code has an interlink with Section 195(1)(b) it is necessary to refer to that sub-section in the present context. The said sub-section reads as follows: 22 "340. When upon an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, any Court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest of justice that an inquiry should be made into any offence referred to in clause (b) of subsection (1) of Section 195, which appears to have been committed in or in relation to a proceeding in that Court or, as the case may be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court, such Court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,-- (a) record a finding to that effect; (b) make a complaint thereof in writing; (c) send it to a Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction; (d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged offence is non-bailable and the Court thinks it necessary so to do, send the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and (e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate." 13. The three-Judge Bench of this Court in Patel Laljibhai Somabhai case [(1971) 2 SCC 376 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 548 : AIR 1971 SC 1935] has interpreted the corresponding section in the old Code, [Section 195(1)(c)] in almost the same manner as indicated above. It is advantageous in this context to extract clause (c) of Section 195(1) of the old Code: "195. (1)(c) No Court shall take cognizance.-- of any offence described in Section 463 or punishable under Section 471, Section 475 or Section 476 of the same Code, when such offence is alleged to have been committed by a party to any proceeding in any Court in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in such proceeding, except on the complaint in writing of such Court, or of some other Court to which such Court is subordinate." (emphasis supplied) The issue involved in Patel Laljibhai Somabhai case [(1971) 2 SCC 376 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 548 : AIR 1971 SC 1935] related to the applicability of that sub-section to a case where forged document was produced in a suit by a party thereto, and subsequently a prosecution was launched against him for offences under Sections 467 and 471 of IPC through a private complaint. The ratio of the decision therein is the following: (SCC Headnote) "The offences about which the court alone is clothed with the right to complain may, therefore, be appropriately considered to be only those offences committed by a party to a proceeding in that court, the commission of which has a reasonably close nexus with the proceedings in that court so that it can without embarking upon a 23 completely independent and fresh inquiry, satisfactorily consider by reference principally to its records the expediency of prosecuting the delinquent party. It, therefore, appears to be more appropriate to adopt the strict construction of confirming the prohibition contained in Section 195(1)(c) only to those cases in which the offences specified therein were committed by a party to the proceeding in the character as such party." 13. Considering the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sachida Nand Singh (supra), it is obvious that Magistrate has wrongly held that Section 195(1)(b) Cr. P.C. bars registration of FIR even in a case where alleged forgery has been committed in the document out side the Court and thereafter, it has been filed in a judicial proceedings in a case pending in a Court. 14. Apart from this Section 195(1)(b) Cr. P.C., imposes no bar on registration of a criminal case relating to such forge documents, it merely bars that the Magistrate shall not take cognizance of an offence regarding such forged document unless the Court, in which, forgery has been committed, filed a complaint case in accordance with the provision of Section 340 Cr. P.C. The Magistrate has not discussed or given any other reason for rejecting the application filed under Section 156(3) Cr. P.C. and also has not considered the other point raised in the application for registering a criminal case regarding alleged forged affidavit and false will." The learned Judge of the Allahabad High Court holds that Section 195(1)(b) bars the Court to take cognizance of the offence in which forgery has been committed in the documents filed in any case pending in any civil, criminal or revenue Court. It is thus, at the stage of cognizance the bar would become applicable. I am in respectful agreement with what the High Court of Allahabad has held. The Apex Court in the case of WAZIR KHAN v. STATE OF 24 UTTARAKHAND2 following the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of TRIMUKH MAROTI KIRKAN v. STATE OF MAHARASHTRA3 has held as follows: "28. If an offence takes place inside the four walls of a house and in such circumstances where the assailants have all the opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the time and in the circumstances of their choice, it will be extremely difficult for the prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of the accused, if the strict principle of circumstantial evidence, is insisted upon by the courts. Reference could be made to a decision of this Court in Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra [Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra, (2006) 10 SCC 681 : (2007) 1 SCC (Cri) 80] , in which this Court observed that a Judge does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished. This Court proceeded to observe that a Judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties. The law does not enjoin a duty on the prosecution to lead evidence of such character, which is almost impossible to be led, or at any rate, extremely difficult to be led. The duty on the prosecution is to lead such evidence, which it is capable of leading, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case." The Apex Court observes that the judge does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished but to judge that a guilty man does not escape. Both these are public duties. If the observation of the Apex Court is paraphrased to the facts obtaining in the case at hand, in the considered view of the Court, there can be no interference at this stage to quash the 2 (2023) 8 SCC 597 3 (2006) 10 SCC 681 25 registration of the crime against the petitioners. If interference at the hands of this Court would happen, it would run foul of the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of KAPTAN SINGH v. STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH4 wherein it is held as follows: "9.1. At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present case the High Court in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC has quashed the criminal proceedings for the offences under Sections 147 , 148 , 149 , 406 , 329 and 386 IPC. It is required to be noted that when the High Court in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC quashed the criminal proceedings, by the time the investigating officer after recording the statement of the witnesses, statement of the complainant and collecting the evidence from the incident place and after taking statement of the independent witnesses and even statement of the accused persons, has filed the charge-sheet before the learned Magistrate for the offences under Sections 147 , 148 , 149 , 406 , 329 and 386 IPC and even the learned Magistrate also took the cognizance. From the impugned judgment and order [Radhey Shyam Gupta v. State of U.P., 2020 SCC OnLine All 914] passed by the High Court, it does not appear that the High Court took into consideration the material collected during the investigation/inquiry and even the statements recorded. If the petition under Section 482 CrPC was at the stage of FIR in that case the allegations in the FIR/complaint only are required to be considered and whether a cognizable offence is disclosed or not is required to be considered. However, thereafter when the statements are recorded, evidence is collected and the charge-sheet is filed after conclusion of the investigation/inquiry the matter stands on different footing and the Court is required to consider the material/evidence collected during the investigation. Even at this stage also, as observed and held by this Court in a catena of decisions, the High Court is not required to go into 4 (2021) 9 SCC 35 26 the merits of the allegations and/or enter into the merits of the case as if the High Court is exercising the appellate jurisdiction and/or conducting the trial. As held by this Court in Dineshbhai Chandubhai Patel [Dineshbhai Chandubhai Patel v. State of Gujarat, (2018) 3 SCC 104 : (2018) 1 SCC (Cri) 683] in order to examine as to whether factual contents of FIR disclose any cognizable offence or not, the High Court cannot act like the investigating agency nor can exercise the powers like an appellate court. It is further observed and held that that question is required to be examined keeping in view, the contents of FIR and prima facie material, if any, requiring no proof. At such stage, the High Court cannot appreciate evidence nor can it draw its own inferences from contents of FIR and material relied on. It is further observed it is more so, when the material relied on is disputed. It is further observed that in such a situation, it becomes the job of the investigating authority at such stage to probe and then of the court to examine questions once the charge-sheet is filed along with such material as to how far and to what extent reliance can be placed on such material. 9.2. In Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar [Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar v. State of Maharashtra, (2019) 18 SCC 191 : (2020) 3 SCC (Cri) 672] after considering the decisions of this Court in Bhajan Lal [State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 426] , it is held by this Court that exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC to quash the proceedings is an exception and not a rule. It is further observed that inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC though wide is to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution, only when such exercise is justified by tests specifically laid down in the section itself. It is further observed that appreciation of evidence is not permissible at the stage of quashing of proceedings in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC. Similar view has been expressed by this Court in Arvind Khanna [CBI v. Arvind Khanna, (2019) 10 SCC 686 : (2020) 1 SCC (Cri) 94] , Managipet [State of Telangana v. Managipet, (2019) 19 SCC 87 : (2020) 3 SCC (Cri) 702] and in XYZ [XYZ v. State of Gujarat, (2019) 10 SCC 337 : (2020) 1 SCC (Cri) 173] , referred to hereinabove. 27 9.3. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decisions to the facts of the case on hand, we are of the opinion that the High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction in quashing the criminal proceedings in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC. 10. The High Court has failed to appreciate and consider the fact that there are very serious triable issues/allegations which are required to be gone into and considered at the time of trial. The High Court has lost sight of crucial aspects which have emerged during the course of the investigation. The High Court has failed to appreciate and consider the fact that the document i.e. a joint notarised affidavit of Mamta Gupta Accused 2 and Munni Devi under which according to Accused 2 Ms Mamta Gupta, Rs 25 lakhs was paid and the possession was transferred to her itself is seriously disputed. It is required to be noted that in the registered agreement to sell dated 27- 10-2010, the sale consideration is stated to be Rs 25 lakhs and with no reference to payment of Rs 25 lakhs to Ms Munni Devi and no reference to handing over the possession. However, in the joint notarised affidavit of the same date i.e. 27-10-2010 sale consideration is stated to be Rs 35 lakhs out of which Rs 25 lakhs is alleged to have been paid and there is a reference to transfer of possession to Accused 2. Whether Rs 25 lakhs has been paid or not the accused have to establish during the trial, because the accused are relying upon the said document and payment of Rs 25 lakhs as mentioned in the joint notarised affidavit dated 27-10-2010. It is also required to be considered that the first agreement to sell in which Rs 25 lakhs is stated to be sale consideration and there is reference to the payment of Rs 10 lakhs by cheques. It is a registered document. The aforesaid are all triable issues/allegations which are required to be considered at the time of trial. The High Court has failed to notice and/or consider the material collected during the investigation. 11. Now so far as the finding recorded by the High Court that no case is made out for the offence under Section 406 IPC is concerned, it is to be noted that the High Court itself has noted that the joint notarised affidavit dated 27-10-2010 is seriously disputed, however as per the High Court the same is required to be considered in the civil proceedings. There the 28 High Court has committed an error. Even the High Court has failed to notice that another FIR has been lodged against the accused for the offences under Sections 467 , 468 , 471 IPC with respect to the said alleged joint notarised affidavit. Even according to the accused the possession was handed over to them. However, when the payment of Rs 25 lakhs as mentioned in the joint notarised affidavit is seriously disputed and even one of the cheques out of 5 cheques each of Rs 2 lakhs was dishonoured and according to the accused they were handed over the possession (which is seriously disputed) it can be said to be entrustment of property. Therefore, at this stage to opine that no case is made out for the offence under Section 406 IPC is premature and the aforesaid aspect is to be considered during trial. It is also required to be noted that the first suit was filed by Munni Devi and thereafter subsequent suit came to be filed by the accused and that too for permanent injunction only. Nothing is on record that any suit for specific performance has been filed. Be that as it may, all the aforesaid aspects are required to be considered at the time of trial only. 12. Therefore, the High Court has grossly erred in quashing the criminal proceedings by entering into the merits of the allegations as if the High Court was exercising the appellate jurisdiction and/or conducting the trial. The High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction in quashing the criminal proceedings in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC. 13. Even the High Court has erred in observing that original complaint has no locus. The aforesaid observation is made on the premise that the complainant has not placed on record the power of attorney along with the counter filed before the High Court. However, when it is specifically stated in the FIR that Munni Devi has executed the power of attorney and thereafter the investigating officer has conducted the investigation and has recorded the statement of the complainant, accused and the independent witnesses, thereafter whether the complainant is having the power of attorney or not is to be considered during trial. 29 14. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the impugned judgment and order [Radhey Shyam Gupta v. State of U.P., 2020 SCC OnLine All 914] passed by the High Court quashing the criminal proceedings in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC is unsustainable and the same deserves to be quashed and set aside and is accordingly quashed and set aside. Now, the trial is to be conducted and proceeded further in accordance with law and on its own merits. It is made clear that the observations made by this Court in the present proceedings are to be treated to be confined to the proceedings under Section 482 CrPC only and the trial court to decide the case in accordance with law and on its own merits and on the basis of the evidence to be laid and without being influenced by any of the observations made by us hereinabove. The present appeal is accordingly allowed." (Emphasis supplied) 14. In the light of the aforesaid reasons, I do not find any warrant to interfere with the impugned proceedings. Hence, the following: ORDER (i) The criminal petition lacking in merit stands rejected. Interim order of any kind operating, shall stand dissolved. (ii) It is made clear that the observations made in the course of the order are only for the purpose of consideration of the case of petitioners under Section 30 482 of Cr.P.C. and the same shall not bind or influence the proceedings against them in the pending proceedings or other proceedings pending before any other fora. Consequently, pending applications if any, also stand disposed. Sd/- (M. NAGAPRASANNA) JUDGE bkp CT:SS