Ajay Vatan vs Shashi Vatan on 27 May, 2024 IN THE COURT OF MS. T. PRIYADARSHINI ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE SOUTH DISTRICT, SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI CT CASE/ 473942/2016 AJAY VATAN Vs. SHASHI VATAN AJAY VATAN S/o Sh. Chhota Singh R/o Khasra no. 304/1, Plus Farm Holi Chowk, near Sunil Store, Neb Sarai, New Delhi. .... Complainant Versus SHASHI VATAN D/o Late Sh. TC Aneja R/o C-3, JVTS Garden, Chattarpur, New Delhi ....Accused Police Station: Saket Date of institution : 08.10.2016 Date of reserving : 24.05.2024 Date of pronouncement : 27.05.2024 JUDGMENT 1. The instant complaint has been filed under Section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter "the Code"). BRIEF FACTS OF THE COMPLAINT 2. It is the case of the complainant that the accused Shashi Vatan was the wife of the complainant on whose complaint an FIR No. 158/2009 was registered against the complainant Ajay Vatan u/s 420 / 468 / 471 IPC. It is alleged that the accused Shashi Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 1 of 8 Vatan in connivance with her counsel namely Rajender Kumar, have intentionally defamed the complainant Ajay Vatan in her protest petition filed in FIR No. 158/2009 dated 26.06.2014, in Para 9 mentioning the accused as "the accused Ajay Vatan/ husband of the complainant/ applicant is a psycho case who...". The complainant submitted that the accused had committed offences punishable under Sections 499 / 500 / 504 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as "the IPC "). The matter was posted for pre-summoning evidence. COURT PROCEEDINGS 3. This Court adopted the procedure prescribed under the Code for trial of the summons cases instituted otherwise than on a police report and fixed the matter for evidence of the complainant. At the stage of pre-summoning, the complainant examined himself as CW1. He did not examine any other witnesses at pre-summoning stage. 4. The Ld. Predecessor Judge vide detailed order dated 11.08.2017, summoned the accused Shashi Vatan for the offence punishable under Section 500 IPC. However, the Ld. Predecessor Judge observed that no prima facie case is made out against the lawyer Mr. Rajender Kumar and declined issuance of summons to him. Subsequently, the matter was listed for framing of notice. FRAMING OF NOTICE 5. Vide detailed order dated 05.04.2018, the Ld. Predecessor Judge held that a prima facie case for commission of offence under Section 500 IPC is made out against the accused and Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 2 of 8 accordingly, notice was framed under Section 251 of the Code on the above said date wherein the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The matter was then listed for post-summoning evidence wherein the complainant examined himself as CW1 in post-summoning evidence. The complainant did not examine any other witness. Thereafter, the complainant closed his post- summoning evidence. COMPLAINANT'S EVIDENCE (POST-SUMMONING) 6. CW1 Sh. Ajai Vatan deposed that an FIR no. 158/2009 was registered against him, on complaint of the accused u/s 420 / 468 / 471 IPC, which after about 10 years of trial, was dismissed by the Ld. Court on 30.03.2019. The accused filed a protest petition in aforesaid FIR dated 26.06.2014. In the said protest petition, in para 9, she mentioned that the complainant as a "psycho case" which according to Oxford English Dictionary denotes "mental disease consisting in loss of balance between instincts and controlling power, mentally deranged person and treatment of mental illness" among others. He averred that the same was done with an intent of deliberate venting of frustration, ill-will on behalf of the accused in an attempt to disturb mental peace of complainant. The accused is a compulsive habitual and repeat offender and she levelled such allegations against him despite of the fact that he obtained divorce from accused on the grounds of cruelty. The witness was duly cross-examined by the Ld. Defence Counsel. STATEMENT OF THE ACCUSED 7. Statement of the accused was recorded under Section 313 Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 3 of 8 of the Code on 22.03.2024, wherein she denied the entire evidence against her. She stated that she is not aware about the averments in protest petition. She only followed the guidance and drafting of her counsel. She further stated that the complainant had filed about 20-22 cases against her and she was under a lot of stress. She did not go through all the documents that were filed on her behalf and her intent was not to defame the complainant. The accused inter alia stated that she is innocent, has not committed any offence and has been falsely implicated in this case. She did not lead any evidence in her defence. Thereafter, the matter was listed for final arguments. ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS 8. The record has been thoroughly and carefully perused. The respective submissions of the complainant and Mr. Vipin Choudhary, Ld. Counsel for the accused have been considered. 9. Defamation is defined in Section 499 of IPC as follows: "499. Defamation - Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. Explanation 1 - It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2 - It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3 - An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 4 of 8 Explanation 4 - No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral of intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in the loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful." 10. On a plain reading, the following ingredients of defamation can be culled out. First, there must be an imputation. Second, such imputation must have been made with intent of harming or knowing or having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person in respect of whom it is made. Third, the case shall not fall in any of the exceptions enumerated in Section 499 . In the case of Jayappa vs. Shamegowda (ILR 1985 Kar 680), the Division Bench of the Hon'ble Karnataka High Court enunciated that before a person is found guilty of the offence of defamation punishable under Section 500 I.P.C., not only the prosecution has to prove the imputations, verbal or written, made by the accused, but it also has to prove that the accused made such defamatory imputations with intention of defaming, ridiculing or undermining the reputation of the person complaining of the defamation. In the absence of any such proof or material, however vituperative the abuses may be, the abuses by themselves may not be sufficient to constitute an offence of defamation punishable under Section 500 of IPC. 11. In Prem Pal Singh vs. Mohan Lal (1981 SCC OnLine HP 35), the Hon'ble Himachal Pradesh High Court enunciated that the imputation within the meaning of Section 499 of the IPC means accusation against a person and it implies an allegation of fact and not merely as a term of abuse. These cases were cited by Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 5 of 8 the Hon'ble High Court of Bombay in Naresh Kanayalal Rajwani vs. State of Maharashtra [2024 SCC OnLine Bom 1321] and observation was made on the distinction between the defamatory imputation and abuses. Mere use of abusive terms without intent to convey that the person abused, in fact, fits the abusive character may not by itself be defamation. The imputation is, therefore, required to be considered in the light of the relevant position of the parties, the situation in their lives and the attendant circumstances in which those imputations were made. 12. At this stage, it is pertinent to look into the eighth exception enumerated in Section 499 of IPC. Exception 8 to Section 499 clearly indicates that it is not a defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with regard to the subject-matter of accusation. In the considered opinion of this Court, the imputation in the protest petition alleged as defamatory is squarely covered within the eighth exception mentioned in Section 499 of IPC. 13. A similar case on point is the judgment of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Dr. P Sharma vs. P.S. Popli (2002 I AD Delhi 569) wherein a complaint was filed u/s 500 IPC alleging that imputations were made by the accused in the special leave petition filed in the Hon'ble Apex Court which were intended to harm the reputation of the complainant. The accused was summoned for offence punishable u/s 500 IPC. Aggrieved by the said summoning order, the accused filed a petition before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi which was allowed and the Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 6 of 8 complaint was quashed as the court concluded that copy of the complaint and any other connected document which were filed with the SLP before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India was with the intention of getting the complaint quashed and the imputations were preferred in good faith and therefore, it could not be said that the intention or knowledge was present to cause harm to the reputation of the complainant. It was further observed that accusations were made before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India which had authority over the subject matter in dispute and therefore, the imputation was covered within the eight exception to Section 499 IPC. 14. On the basis of the same analogy, it can be said that the protest petition was filed before the Learned Metropolitan Magistrate with the intention to obtain orders for further investigation against the complainant and therefore, cannot be said to be made with an intent to defame the complainant. The averments in the protest petition were made in good faith and therefore, it cannot be said that the intention or knowledge that the reputation of the complainant would be tarnished cannot be attributed to the complainant which is sine qua non to bring home a charge of defamation against the accused. Further, the alleged imputation was made before the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate who had the authority over the subject matter in dispute which is the closure report filed by the IO in favour of the complainant. Also, it cannot be ruled out that the complainant has an axe to grind with the accused (who is his divorced wife) as he has filed various cases against the accused. As mentioned above, the complainant has not proven existence of intent to defame on Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 7 of 8 behalf of the accused and the present case is covered within the eighth exception mentioned in Section 499 of IPC. This is a fit case for acquittal of accused on account of absence of cogent and consistent evidence to bring home the charges against her. Hence, accused Ms. Shashi Vatan D/o Late Sh. TC Aneja is acquitted of the offence punishable under Section 500 of IPC. 15. Accused is directed to comply with the provisions of Section 437A of the Code. 16. File be consigned to the Record Room. Dictated and announced in open Court on 27.05.2024. Digitally signed by T T PRIYADARSHINI PRIYADARSHINI Date: 2024.05.29 16:44:02 +0530 (T. Priyadarshini) Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate South District, Saket Courts, New Delhi 27.05.2024 Ajay Vatan Vs. Shashi Vatan PS: Saket Page 8 of 8