M/S. Sunderlal & Sons & Others vs Chhedilal Gupta on 25 August, 2011 Author: Kanchan Chakraborty Bench: Kanchan Chakraborty 1 IN THE HIGH COURT AT CALCUTTA CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION (APPELLATE SIDE) PRESENT : The Hon'ble Justice Kanchan Chakraborty C.R.R No. 4059 of 2009 M/s. Sunderlal & Sons & Others Versus Chhedilal Gupta For the Petitioners : Mr. Milon Mukherjee Mr. Md. Farhauddin For the O.P. No. 1 : Mr. Subroto Bose Mr. Ratanlal Joshi Heard On : 3.8.2011 Judgement On :25.8.2011 Kanchan Chakraborty, J: 1) Chhedilal Gupta, the opposite party no. 1 (hereinafter referred to as Mr. Gupta), is, no doubt, a person of immense repute and is having high degree of honour and prestige in the field he spent a considerable period of time of his life. A Criminal prosecution being Shakespeare Sarani Police Station case no. 299 dated 19.9.2006 corresponding to G.R. Case no. 2080 of 2006, arising out of a petition of complaint registered as C 10077 of 2006 in the Court of learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Calcutta under Section 120B / 406 / 420 / 506 (II) of the Indian Penal Code was initiated by the petitioners herein M/s. Sunderlal & Sons & Ors. against him. Mr. 2 Gupta challenged the continuation of the proceeding in the High Court. This Court, in Criminal revision being no. CRR 3702 of 2006 dated 5.7.2007 quashed that proceeding on the grounds that the allegations and aspersions put forth against Mr. Gupta by the petitioners were civil in nature given rise to a civil litigation as there was no element of criminality on the part of Mr. Gupta. Mr. Gupta felt that he was demeaned, harassed and his reputation, dignity and honour was lowered in the eyes of other in his society. He lodged a complaint against the present petitioners alleging therein that the said Criminal action was initiated by the present petitioners with mal intention amounting to an offence falling within the ambit of Section 499 of IPC punishable under Section 500 of IPC. The learned Magistrate, upon perusal of the petition of complaint filed by Mr. Gupta and initial statement made by him on S/A, issued process against the petitioners under Section 204 of Cr.P.C. 2) The petitioners have come up with this application praying for quashing of the proceeding being no. C 1332 of 2009 under Section 500 of the IPC pending before the learned Judicial Magistrate, 5th Court, Alipore, 24 Parganas (South) mainly on the ground that no offence, whatsoever, even if the allegations and aspersions made in the petition of complaint are accepted on their face value in their entirety and unontroverted do not constitute any offence punishable under Section 500 IPC. 3) The only question to be considered in this application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal procedure is whether, on the face value of the 3 averments made in the petition of complaint filed by Mr. Gupta against the present petitioners, prima facie, make out any case under Section 500 IPC or not. It should not be lost sight of that the case in question was filed on a complaint under Section 200 of the Code and the Court concerned examined Mr. Gupta, the petitioners before issuing process under Section 204 of the Code against the present petitioners. So, not only the petition of complaint but the initial statement of Mr. Gupta as well as the order passed by this Court in Criminal revision no. CRR 3702 of 2006 dated 5.7.2007 are to be looked into. 4) There is another reason to look into the order dated 5.7.2007 in CRR no. 3702 of 2006 inasmuch as according to Mr. Gupta, this Court found that the allegations and aspersions put forth in the Criminal case being G.R. No. 2080 of 2006 in the Court of learned CMM, Calcutta initiated by the present petitioners were false, frivolous, vexatious and malafide. 5) Reference to the factual aspects is not required to be reiterated as the question to be answered in this case is clear and specific. Rather, it would be expedient to refer to the facts averred in the petition of complaint, initial statement made by Mr. Gupta in the Court at Alipore and order dated 5.7.2007 passed in C.R.R. 3702 of 2006. The relevant averments of the petition of complaint lodged by Mr. Gupta are set out below : Para 11 :-That in the said circumstances while the complainant has been enjoying his peaceful retired life, in the later part of the month of September, 2006, the complainant came to know that 4 the Police of Shakespeare Sarani Police Station had been searching the complainant in connection with an alleged Criminal case. The complainant was constrained to cause search about the said criminal case through his agent and found out:- On the basis of a petition of complaint filed by the accused No. 1 represented by the accused No. 5 before the Learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Calcutta and forwarded by the said Learned Court, the Officer-in-charge, Shakespeare Sarani Police Station started the case being No. 299 dated 19.09.2006 under Sections 120B / 406 / 506 (ii) of the Indian Penal Code which ultimately was recorded as G.R. case no. 2080 of 2006. The said petition of complaint inter alia reads as follows:- i) On or about 5th September, 2006 one Mr. Dinesh Gupta being one of the Partner of M/s Sunderlal & Son lodged an alleged written complaint with the Officer-in-charge of Shakespeare Sarani Police Station alleging, inter-alia, that sometime in the month of April, 1999 certain amount of money through various cheques was given to the , M/s. Gaya Prasad Chhedilal of 13, Camac Street, Kolkata- 700017 as a loan amount. It was further alleged that as result of an understanding by 5 and between the parties the said loan amount would be paid by 31st March, 2002. It was further alleged that the said loan amount as on 31st March, 2002 was Rs. 45,50,000/- ii) On or about 13th September, 2006 an application under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure was filed by the defecto complainant M/s. Sunderlal & Son through their authorized Attorney Mr. Harshvardhan Gupta making Shri Ramlal Gupta, Shri Rajesh Gupta both sons of the complainant and M/s. Gaya Prasad Chhedilal as accused Nos. 2,3 and 4 therein and the complainant as accused No. 1 therein. It was alleged inter alia, that the defacto complainant made financial assistance to the accused person as per the assurance of the accused person and the defacto complainant gave such financial help amount to Rs. 45,50,000/-. iii) It was further alleged that the relation between the defacto complainant and the accused person are so good as a result the partners of the defacto complainant company did not 6 bother of the return of the entrusted and parted amount with the passage of time. iv) It was further alleged that the accused persons in the year 2002 reassured about the return of the said amount within a short time as they had been trying their level best to over come some unwanted difficulties faced by them and to show good gesture the accused persons made some payment to the defacto complainant and further assured that the rest amount will be paid from time to time. It is further alleged that on or about 4th September, 2006 one of the partner of the defacto complainant along with his staff at about 5-35 P.M. went to the office to the accused persons and when the defacto complainant's representative demanded money from the accused persons, became totally stranger and indifferent and further alleged that the accused persons resorted to physical violence and criminally intimated the defacto complainant's representative and staff. On the basis of such purported application a prayer 7 was made before the Learned Chief Metropolitan Matistrate, Calcutta resulting in Complaint Case No. C/10077 of 2006, for a direction to send the application to the concerned Police station for causing an investigation into the matter after treating the petition of complaint as an F.I.R. Accordingly the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate most mechanically and without applying his judicial mind passed an order for an investigation into the matter and to file a compliance report on the date fixed. A copy of the said petition of complaint is annexed hereto and marked as Annexure "A". Para- 12:- That after going through the said petition of complaint, being the First Information report of the Shakespeare Sarani Police Station Case No. 299 dated 15.09.2006 (G.R. Case No. 2080 of 2006), the complainant was totally shocked, surprised and shakened. The Complainant found out from the petition of complaint that the accused Nos. 1 to 5, as complainant, brought alleged allegations of breach of trust, cheating, misappropriation, criminal intimidation, criminal conspiracy in furtherance of common intention against the 8 complainant along with the other accused persons, in the said petition of complaint making he complainants accused No. 1 in the said case. Para- 13;- That the alleged allegations of breach of trust, cheating misappropriation criminal intimidation, criminal conspiracy in furtherance of common intention made by the accused No. 1 as defacto complainant in the said case being Shakespeare Sarani Police Station Case No. 299 dated 19.9.2006 (G.R. No. 2080/2006) and the fact that the police had been searching the complainant to arrest him in connection with the said case. Spread like fire amongst the friends and relatives of the complainant and also amongst the business circle in general where the complainant had worked for long 45 years. Para 14 :- That as a result as aforesaid, everybody amongst the friends, relatives and business acquaintances of the complainant started to see and look at the complainant with suspicion. A good number of said friends, relatives and business acquaintances even believed that the complainant was and/or is guilty of offences of breach of trust, cheating misappropriation, criminal intimidation, criminal conspiracy, in furtherance of common intention and in fact complainant had committed those offences. The complainant was so shaken that he avoided people and stopped meeting people and go out of his residence. 9 Para- 15 :-That the complainant of fact used to be looked down upon by those persons. The honour and prestige of the complainant were absolutely lowered in the eyes of the society and the name, fame, honour earned by the complainant that he was/is a good administrator and man of total integrity were at stake. Para- 16:-That in the month of November 2006, Shri Ramlal Gupta, the complainant's eldest son, and who was also made accused No. 2 in the complaint Case No. 299 dated 19.9.2006, moved and application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, being C.R.R. No. 3702 of 2006 before the Hon'ble High Court at Calcutta in Criminal Revisional Jurisdiction for quashing of the proceeding pending before the Learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Calcutta being Shakespeare Sarani Police Station Case No. 299 dated 19.9.2006 corresponding to G.R. No. 2080/06 arising out of complaint Case No. C/10077/06 under Section 120B / 406 / 420 506(ii) of the Indian Penal Code. Para- 17:- Although the Criminal Revision being C.R.R No. 3702/06 had been filed before the Hon'ble High Court, Calcutta as a result of the effect of humiliation and defame suffered by the complainant due to the false criminal case initiated against the complainant with totally false allegations and the effect of the same on the people in general as disclosed earlier, the 10 complainant became totally shattered mentally and physically also felt utterly humiliated, depressed and also became critically ill and bedridden developing severe heart problems. Initially the complainant was treated at his residence for some time. Thereafter when the illness continued and the conditions of the complainant deteriorated further, the complainant on 16.5.2007 had to be shifted to Woodlands Nursing Home for about a week and who discharged on 22.05.2007. Although the complainant was released from woodlands Nursing Home after one week, his treatment continued at his residence. Thereafter, in the first week of June 2007, as a sequel to the illness, the health of the complainant again deteriorated and the complainant had to be shifted to B. M. Birla Heart Research Centre on 05.06.2007 and he was there for about 5 (five) days. The complainant had to undergo angloplasty operation in his heart at B.M. Birla Heart Research Centre, Alipore , Kolkata. Para 18 :-That initially the complainant intended to move appropriate legal forum against the alleged Criminal case being Shakespeare Sarani P.S. case No. 299 dated 19.9.2000, but due to his serious illness and the fact that Shri Ramlal Gupta, complainant's eldest son, had already moved a Revisional Application in the High Court at Calcutta for quashing the said case, the complainant did not move the said application. The 11 complainant also waited for the outcome of the result of the said Criminal Revisional Application. Para 19:- The Criminal Revision being C.R.R. No. 3702 of 2006 ultimately was heard by the Hon'ble Justice Sadhan Kumar Gupta and His Lordship, by the judgement dated 05.07.2007, was pleased to allow the said Revisional Application and quash the criminal case being G.R. Case No. 2080/2006, Shakespeare Sarani, Police Station Case No. 299 dated 19.09.2006 initiated by the accused No. 1 through the accused No. 5 named above. 6) It is further averred in paragrpah no. 21, " that It is clear from the specific observations made by His Lordship the Hon'ble Justice Sadhan Kumar Gupta in His Judgement dated 05.07.2007, as quoted above, that the allegations of breach of trust, cheating, misappropriation, Criminal intimidation, criminal conspiracy in furtherance of common intention brought against the complainant in Shakespeare Sarani Police Station Case No. 299 dated 19.09.2006 (G.R. No. 2080/06) by the accused Nos. 1 and 5 were and have been totally false and baseless and due to such false and baseless allegations brought against him, the complainant had to suffer humiliation and disgrace, his honour, prestige and integrity had been totally lowered in the eyes of the people, the complainant could not bear the said humiliation and disgrace 12 and became critically ill and mentally depressed and had to bear huge costs for his medical treatments at home and at the hospitals. The accused no. 1 was the defacto complainant of the said Criminal case being represented by Harshvardhan Gupta, the accused no. 5 herein and accused Nos. 2,3 and 4 are partners of the accused no. 1. That apart from the fact that the Criminal Case being G.R. No. 2080/06 has been quashed by his Lordship the Hon'ble Justice Sadhan Kumar Gupta of the Hon'ble High Court at Calcutta and all the allegations made against the complainant have been proved to be false, it is recorded in this connection that the complainant was never and/or is a partner of M/s. Gayaprsad Chhedilal of 13, Camac Street, Kolkata - 700017 and/or was/is connected with the business activities of the said firm in any manner whatsoever. This proves further as to who false the criminal case being Shakespeare Sarani Police Station Case No. 299 dated 19.09.2006 (G.R. no. 2080/2006) and the allegations made therein were and/or are defamatory made knowingly with intent to harm the reputation of the complainant" 7) The initial statement made by Mr. Gupta in the Court of learned Magistrate at Alipore are as follows : " Examion of the Complainant Chhedilal Gupta on S.A. 13 I have filed this case against Sundar Lal and son, Suresh Gupta, Mahesh Gupta, Dinesh Gupta and Harshobardhan Gupta. I have passed B. Com. In the year 1952. I Have worked for Baldeogram Saligram Pvt. Ltd. an Secretary and then as Managing director of the same company. I have retired from the Company 1997 from the Company. After retirement I engaged myself in social work. (Deferred on prayer of Complainant) Read over and explained Explained Chhedilal Gupta 28.7.09. At the time of my retirement from Shaligra Company, the out tern was crores of rupees. It had a goodwill. The company dealt with food grains. The company used to deal with Jardin Henderson Ltd. and Thomas Duff etc. I was managing director of the Company. I was very famous and well known in the eyes of others. I was the Sr. Vice President of Kesarwani Society. In September, 2006, I got an information that the accused No. 5 had started a cheating case against me. I came to know that police was searching for me. I was falsely implicated in the case. I was shocked and fell ill. My elder son filed a case in the Hon'ble High Court for quashing the case 14 against me. The case was quashed by the Hon'ble Court. I fell ill. I sustained a loss of 10 lakhs which I expended an my illness due to shock of the false allegation against me. I have filed the order of the Hon'ble Court. I recovered in 2008 and consulted my Ld. Lawyer and I sent a notice for compensation for Rs. 2 Crores. I was ill and so could not contact my Ld. Advocate. People started talking about me in a different way. People started doubting me. I was defamed by such act of the accused persons in the eyes of my known people. I suffered mental and physical pain. My prestige was lowered down by the accused persons. Hence, I have filed this case. I pray for justice. Sd/-IIIegible" Chhedilal Gupta 19.08.2009 (8) The observations of this Court in C.R.R. 3702 of 2006 dated 5.7.2007 are reproduced below : " Keeping this legal position in mind, let us now consider the contents of the F.I.R. which should be the sole basis for coming to the conclusion as to whether the criminal proceeding should be allowed to be continued or not. I have carefully gone through the First Information Report. It appears clearly from the said First information Report that it is the case of the complainant that the money was advanced in favour of the accused persons towards loan with the assurance by the accused persons to repay the 15 same. The First Information Report further discloses that when the loan was given at that time there was very good relationship in between the parties and it further appears that on previous occasion also the complainant company advanced loan in favour of the accused persons who also repaid the same from time to time. So far as this transaction is concerned, it appears that some amount, although negligible in nature, has been repaid by the accused persons. So there cannot be any doubt that the impugned transaction in between the parties was nothing but a business transaction and pursuant to the relationship, as prevailing between the parties, the loan was given by the complainant to the accused persons. The complainant has claimed that the accused persons cheated him by way of not making the payment. In order to attract provisions of cheating, as defined in the Indian Penal Code , the complainant has tried to set up a case to the effect that the accused persons had from the very beginning the intention to cheat him. But I have already pointed out that in the petition of complaint itself it has been stated therein that there was very good relationship in between the parties and the complainant advanced the money in favour of the accused persons to help them to overcome the financial crisis that was being faced by them in their business. So apparently it appears that there is nothing to suggent that from the very inception the accused persons had the intention 16 to cheat the complainant. The nature of transaction, as took place in between the parties closely suggests that it was purely a business transaction and rise to a civil dispute and not a dispute of criminal nature as claimed by the complainant in the F.I.R. From the F.I.R. I have got no hesitation to hold that there was no element of cheating, far to speak of the element of breach of trust, as claimed by the complainant. The dispute must be held to be of civil in nature which can be settled in accused persons are discharged. The interim order of stay stands vacated. Send a copy of this judgement to the Court below for once for information and taking necessary action. Xerox certified copy, if applied for, may be handed over to the parties on urgent basis. (Sadhan Kumar Gupta,J) 9) The backdrop prompted Mr. Gupta to file the complaint under challenge obviously is the observations of this Court in Criminal Revision No. 3702 of 2006. A careful analysis of the same indicates manifestly and explicitly that this Court came to a conclusion while quashing the Criminal Case No. G.R. 2080 of 2006 initiated by the present petitioners against Mr. Gupta that the allegations and aspersions put forth by the petitioners against Mr. Gupta, in fact and in substance, did not give rise to any criminal action but civil action. In other words, the acts allegedly done by Mr. Gupta were, no doubt, 17 actionable but not in Criminal Court but in Civil Court. There was civil remedy open to the petitioners to get their dispute rightly redressed. The facts go to show that the petitioners have actually instituted a civil suit against Mr. Gupta soon thereafter in respect of the disputes between them and Mr. Gupta. No where within the four corners of the order dated 5.7.2007 in CRR 3702 of 2006 this Court has mentioned far so given any hint that the allegations and aspersions made by the petitioners against Mr. Gupta were false and frivolous. 10) This fact also leads to indicate that there was no mal intention on the part of the petitioners to initiate the Criminal proceeding against Mr. Gupta which was quashed by this Court on 5.7.2007 with aforesaid observations. Actually bona fide dispute was raised by the present petitioners but in a wrong forum. Another aspect which should not also be lost sight of, i.e. the order in C.R.R. no. 3702 of 2006 was passed on 5.7.2007 and Mr. Gupta, the opposite party herein lodged the petition of complaint under challenge in the Court of learned Magistrate at Alipore under Section 500 of IPC on 16.3.2009, i.e., 20 months thereafter. Again, none besides Mr. Gupta has come forward, made any initial statement and supported his case that his reputation was lowered in the eyes of the people belonging to his society or his near and closed one. 11) Mr. Milon Mukherjee, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners contended that a mere allegation that reputation has been damaged and dignity and prestige has been lowered in the eyes of other persons simpliciter is not enough for the Magistrate to issue process under 18 Section 204 of the Cr.P.C. A prima facie case should be made out by the complainant to show that his reputation and prestige was lowered in the eyes of others. Allegation of like nature on self-estimation is not enough. In support of his contention, Mr. Mukherjee referred to a decision of this Court in Dipankar Bagchi Vs. State of West Bengal and Anr. , reported in (2010) 1 C.Cr.L.R. (Cal) 403. 12) Mr. Subroto Bose, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the opposite party no. 1 contended that when the allegations and aspersions averred in the petition of complaint supported by the statement made by the complainant in Court, have made out a prima facie case against any person, the Court can proceed further by issuing process under Section 204 of Cr.P.C. In such a case, this Court should not exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code and quash the proceeding. 13) Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code defined "Defamation" as follows :- "" Section 499 . Whoever, by words, either spoken or intended to be publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person." Explanation 1.- It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is 19 intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.- It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.- An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.- No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. First Exception._ .................................................. Second Exception.- ............................................... Third Exception.-................................................... Fourth Exception................................................... Fifth Exception..................................................... Sixth Exception..................................................... Seventh Exception................................................. 20 eighth Exception.- It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation. The essential ingredients the offence of defamation are following :- i) making or punishable any imputation concerning any person; ii) Such imputation must have been made by a) words, either spoken or intended to be read; or b) signs; or c) visible representation; iii) such imputation must have been made with intention to harming or with knowledge or reason to believe that it will harm reputation of the person concerning whom it is made; 14) The meaning of "defamation" according to Black's Law Dictionary Ninth addition, " defamation, 1. The act of harming the reputation of another by making a false statement to a third person. If the alleged defamation involves a matter of public concern, the plaintiff is constitutionally required to prove 21 both the statement's falsity and the defendant's fault. 2. A false written or oral statement that damages another's reputation. " Defamation is the publication of a statement which tends to lower a person in the estimation of right thinking members of society generally; or which tends to make them shun or avoid that person." 15)So, in deciding whether or not a statement, oral or documentary, is defamatory, the criterion is the arbitrim-- boni viri, the opinion of ordinary, just and reasonable citizens. To be actionable it is not sufficient that the words complained of tend to discredit the plaintiff in the eyes of a particular section of the society generally. Thus, words which merely tend to diminish the esteem in which a man is held by members of the criminal classes or by persons otherwise out of sympathy with the law will not support an action, for the Courts can not properly recognize such a standard of opinion. 16)The essence of the offence of defamation consists in its tendency to cause that description of pain which is felt by a person who knows himself to be the object of the unfavourable sentiments of his fellow creatures and those inconveniences to which a person who is the object of such unfavourable sentiments is exposed. It is, however, not necessary that actual harm should be caused. It is sufficient if harm to the reputation of the person to whom the imputation is directed was intended. Accusation simpliciter without proof of requisite intention will not ipso facto constitutes the offence of defamation. 22 17) In the case in hands, it is admitted position that the petitioner herein had some causes to agitate in Court of law. He had chosen a wrong forum as corrected by this Court by order dated 5.7.2007 in C.R.R. no. 3702 of 2007. They, without challenging that order, placed their grievances in a civil Court for redressal. So it appears to me that there was no ill motive on the part of the petitioners to initiate the criminal case against Mr. Gupta in the Court of learned CMM, Kolkata. Action bona fide or in good faith comes within the exception to Section 499 of IPC. 18)Secondly, besides the petition of complaint nothing is forth coming to indicate, prima facie, that his reputation, dignity and prestige was lowered in the eyes of ordinary, just and reasonable persons belonging to the society. What Mr. Gupta had stated in his initial deposition and in the complainant petition are important to look into. It is really astonishing to see that he has not spent much words regarding the pain he felt and fact of lowering of his dignity, reputation and prestige in the eyes of others because of filing of the criminal case by the petitioners against him. None besides him even none of his family members has come forward and said that in his eyes, the reputation and dignity of Mr. Gupta was lowered far so in the eyes of people out side the family. 19)Lastly, the action under challenge was questioned by Mr. Gupta in his petition of complaint before the Court of learned Magistrate at Alipore long 20 months after quashing of the criminal action. 23 20)In the mean time, the petitioner instituted civil suit against him. The inordinate delay in lodging the complaint especially after institution of the civil suit altogether rather raises question as to bona fide on the part of Mr. Gupta. It appears to be a purposeful and afterthought action from his side. 21)So, taking everything into consideration this Court finds that the complaint filed by Mr. Gupta in the Court of learned Magistrate at Alipore prima facie, does not make out any case of defamation in true sense. Any action on the part of the petitioners can not be said to be mala fide. The Criminal action initiated by them on good faith in wrong forum. Therefore, it obviously comes within the exception to Section 499 of IPC. That being so, the proceeding against them under challenge should not be allowed to be continued as it would be amounting to abusing of the process of Court. 22)Accordingly, I allow the application. 23)The proceeding in C.R.R. 1332 of 2009 under Section 500 of the IPC, pending before the learned Judicial Magistrate (1st Class), 5th Court, Alipore, 24 Parganas (Soth) stands quashed. The application is, thus, disposed of. (Kanchan Chakraborty,J)