Smt. Meena Tyagi vs Sh. Veer Singh Tyagi on 24 July, 2014 Criminal Revision No.45/14 IN THE COURT OF SH.PULASTYA PRAMACHALA ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE SHAHDARA DISTRICT, KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI Crl. Revision No. : 45/14 Unique I.D. No. : 02402R0399902013 In the matter of :- 1. Smt. Meena Tyagi W/o Sh. Satish Tyagi R/o : Village Baram, District Meerut, U.P. 2. Sh. Satish Tyagi S/o Sh. Ram Niwas Tyagi R/o : Village Baram, District Meerut, U.P. .....Revisionists VERSUS 1. Sh. Veer Singh Tyagi S/o Late Sh. Bhopal Singh Tyagi, R/o. Village Makanpur, PS: Indirapuram, District: Ghaziabad, U.P. 2. Smt. Savita W/o Sh. Veer Singh Tyagi, R/o. Village Makanpur, PS: Indirapuram, District: Ghaziabad, U.P. 3. State of NCT of Delhi .... Respondents Date of Institution : 10.12.2013 Date of receiving the case in this court : 12.02.2014 Date of reserving order : 28.05.2014 Date of pronouncement : 24.07.2014 Decision : Revision is allowed Page 1 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 ORDER 1. This is a criminal revision petition challenging the order dated 13.09.2013, passed by ld. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi in the case titled as Smt. Meena Tyagi & Anr. v. Veer Singh Tyagi & Anr. bearing CC No. 31/13, Shahdara police station. Vide impugned order, ld. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate dismissed the complaint of the revisionists herein filed under Section 200 Cr.P.C. against respondent No.1 and 2. 2. Briefly stated the relevant facts of this case are that the revisionist no. 1 and 2 are husband and wife and are working in social field to boost the moral character of society, for last more than 14-15 Years and are having good reputation in the society. Sh. Rahul Tyagi is the nephew of revisionists and is son of elder brother of revisionist no.2, who was married to Ms. Reshu Tyagi i.e. the daughter of the respondents herein. The said marriage was solemnized on 17.11.2010 at Village Makanpur, Indirapuram, District Ghaziabad, U.P. After some time of their marriage, revisionists came to know that there were some matrimonial disputes between Rahul Tyagi and Reshu Tyagi and later on, they also came to know that the respondent no.1 along with his associates/relatives and his daughter forcibly entered into the house of Rahul Tyagi on 02.01.2012 and left her daughter at the residence of Rahul Tyagi and went away from there. Thereafter, Rahul lodged a complaint against respondent no.1 and his relatives at Jyoti Nagar police station, Delhi. Thereafter, Reshu Tyagi lodged an FIR no. 177/12, Crime no. 245/12, under Section 498-A / 323 / 504 / 307 IPC r/w Section 3 / 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act against various persons including the revisionists herein. In her complaint, she alleged that Page 2 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 revisionist Meena Tyagi and her daughter Prerna Tyagi and others used to beat her for insufficient dowry and she was also tortured by them. Respondents falsely implicated both the revisionists to lower down their reputation in the society. Respondent Reshu Tyagi had also given false address of both the revisionists. The police officials of PS Indirapuram, U.P. visited their area in their search and disclosed to various persons about the allegations made by Reshu Tyagi against the revisionists. After investigation, both the revisionists were exonerated by the police. Thereafter, the revisionists filed complaint under Section 200 Cr.P.C. for summoning the respondents for offences under Section 500 / 120-B IPC against the respondents and their daughter Reshu Tyagi, before the trial court and the trial court after making inquiry, summoned Reshu Tyagi and dismissed the complaint under Section 203 Cr.P.C. against the respondents no. 1 and 2. Hence the present revision petition. 3. The impugned order has been assailed by the revisionists on the following grounds :- (a) That the impugned order dated 13.09.2013 passed by ld. C.M.M. is liable to be set-aside as ld. C.M.M. has not considered the allegations leveled by the revisionists against respondent no. 1 and 2, supported with the incriminating material available on judicial record. (b) That the impugned order dated 13.09.2013 is illegal, unjust, unfair and perverse as ld. C.M.M. has not summoned respondent no. 1 and 2 under Section 120-B IPC as ld. trial court has wrongly came to the conclusions that no case is made out against respondent no. 1 and 2. (c) That the impugned order is liable to be set-aside on the ground Page 3 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 that even before lodging the Crime No. 245/12, under Section 498-A / 323 / 504 / 307 IPC, PS Indirapuram against the revisionists, respondent No. 1 Sh. Veer Singh Tyagi with his relative forcibly entered into the matrimonial home of his daughter i.e. B-1078, MIG Glats, East of Loni Road Delhi and had given beatings to Rahul Tyagi and his parents and respondents have falsely implicated the revisionists in criminal cases and lodged the said FIR. It is alleged that all the facts and circumstances clearly show that the substantial offence of the criminal conspiracy is made out against the respondents no. 1 and 2 but the ld. trial court did not take into its consideration and passed the order whimsically without going into the depth of the case. (d) That the impugned order dated 13.09.2012 is not a comprehensive order in the eyes of law and the same deserves to be set aside qua respondents. (e) That the bare perusal of the impugned order reveals that the evidence supported with the argument on the point of summoning of the respondents have not even been touched by ld. trial court and the ld. trial Court has not given any finding against the respondents as to why they have not been summoned to face the trial. 4. Arguments were made by both the parties. Ld. counsel for petitioners submitted that the respondents are liable to be summoned on the basis of their statements under Section 161 Cr.P.C. containing imputations against the petitioners. He further submitted that the conduct of both respondents making imputations against the petitioners along with another accused namely Smt. Reshu Tyagi also shows that there was a conspiracy to make false Page 4 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 imputations against the petitioners, in order to defame them. Therefore, an offence under Section 120-B IPC is also made out against all three accused persons. He referred to the judgment passed in Vijaya v. K.S. Sadanandan, AIR 1999 SC 1086, to submit that the Supreme Court has held that there may not be direct evidence in respect of an agreement of conspiracy and existence of such agreement is to be inferred from the circumstances of the case. He further referred to the judgment passed by Supreme Court in M.N. Damani v. S.K. Sinha & Ors. 2001 Cr.L.J. 2571 and another judgment passed by Madras High Court in P. Zainulabideen v. K.M. Sahul 2004 Cr.L.J. 1937, to submit that a case of defamation is made out against the respondents on the basis of their statements given under Section 161 Cr.P.C., because such statements are not absolutely privileged statement and if prima facie imputations are there, then the respondents are liable to be summoned. 5. On the other hand, ld. counsel for respondents argued that present case is merely a pressure tactics to neutralize the complaints made by Smt. Reshu Tyagi. He further submitted that he has challenged the police report as given in Indirapuram, U.P., wherein the petitioners herein were excluded in the chargesheet. He further submitted that till now the statement given to the police is not declared to be false and, therefore, there is no defamation. Ld. counsel for respondents referred to judgment passed by Supreme Court in Baldev Singh v. State of Punjab , AIR 1991 SC 31 and the judgment passed in Rajender Singh v. State of U.P., Criminal Appeal No.1019/2007, decided on 06.08.2007, to submit that the statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. are wholly inadmissible evidence and cannot be taken into consideration. Page 5 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 6. I have given due attention to the rival contentions and the material placed on the record. 7. From the perusal of the statements given by both respondents no.1 and 2 before IO in FIR no.177/12, PS Indirapuram, Ghaziabad, U.P, it is beyond doubt that allegations were made against Smt. Meena Tyagi regarding torture committed against Smt. Reshu Tyagi on account of bringing lesser dowry. The imputations are also there regarding beating of Smt. Reshu Tyagi on the pretext of demand for dowry. These statements were given by these two respondents in support of complaint lodged by Smt. Reshu Tyagi (accused no.3 in the complaint before trial court) for offences under Section 498-A / 323 / 504 / 307 IPC and under Section 3 / 4 Dowry Prohibition Act. 8. CW-2 and CW-3 deposed before trial court that they knew both petitioners. Both petitioners were senior workers of Gayatri Pariwar, which is attached to Shantikunj, Haridwar. They used to organize different Yagya (worship) and used to deliver spiritual teachings for the improvement of society. They came to know about the case registered against both petitioners from U.P police and about demand of dowry being made by petitioners and their family members from Smt. Reshu Tyagi. They also came to know about beatings given to Smt. Reshu Tyagi by the petitioners, through the police, who was in search of petitioners. When the petitioners came to attend the programme organized by Gayatri Pariwar in Balbir Nagar, Shahdara, Delhi on 01.04.2012, they told both petitioners that their acts had defamed the organization and, therefore, the petitioners would not be invited in any further function, because of their misdeeds. It was further told by these persons to the petitioners that on the one hand they were giving spiritual teachings Page 6 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 and on the other hand, their practical actions were contrary to the objectives of the organization. 9. As far as, definition of defamation is concerned, same is provided in Section 499 IPC in the terms that whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person, intending to harm or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person. This Section also provides for certain exceptions. However, the exceptions relate to something, which is to be taken as defence by the accused. In the present case, the imputations were made against both petitioners by the both respondents no.1 and 2. It is not difficult to observe that the allegations made in the statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. are to be treated as imputations. It is also safe to infer that it would be within knowledge of the respondents no.1 and 2 that the allegations made against the petitioners will harm their reputation in the society. Now the question is that whether such statement given under Section 161 Cr.P.C. can be made a basis to file a complaint for defamation. The answer to this question was given by Madras High Court in P. Zainulabideen 's case (supra) in the terms that a statement made under Section 161 Cr.P.C. is only a qualified privilege statement and same can be covered under exception 9 of Section 499 IPC. However, such exception has to be established by the accused during the trial and therefore, a complaint for defamation cannot be rejected out rightly. Supreme Court in M.N. Damani 's case (supra) also set aside a quashing order of a criminal complaint for defamation observing that the question whether imputations were made in good faith, in what circumstance, with what intention etc. are to be examined on the Page 7 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 basis of evidence in the trial. The Court further referred to the another judgment passed in Satrughan Sinha Vs. Raj Bhao (1996) 6 SCC 263, wherein the Court held that "it is the settled legal proposition that a Court has to read the complaint as a whole and find out whether allegations disclosed, constitute an offence under Section 499 IPC, triable by the Magistrate. 10. From the conjoined reading of these case laws, I find that at the stage of summoning of the accused, the Court is not to be guided by the probable defence, which can be taken and established by the accused and which can be based upon any exception provided with Section 499 IPC. In the present case, the complaint made by the petitioners does disclose an offence under Section 500 IPC r/w with Section 499 IPC against respondent no. 1 and 2. I also find that even the ingredients of Section 120-B r/w Section 120-A IPC are satisfied by the disclosed facts in this case, in the sense that it can be safely inferred from the conduct of respondent no. 1 and 2 and Smt. Reshu Tyagi that they acted in collaboration to make imputations against the petitioners. Such circumstance shows that there had been a meeting of mind among these three persons, which constituted an agreement to make imputations against the petitioners. Making false imputations is certainly an offence under Section 499 IPC and therefore, an agreement to make such imputations would be treated as a criminal conspiracy to do an illegal act. Accordingly, I find that respondent no. 1 and 2 along with Smt. Reshu Tyagi are also liable for offence under Section 120-B IPC, besides offence under Section 500 IPC r/w Section 120-B IPC. Hence, revision petition is allowed. 11. It is directed that the trial court would summon respondent no. 1 and 2 i.e. accused no. 1 and 2 in the complaint before the trial court Page 8 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Revision No.45/14 for offence, as disclosed/mentioned herein-above. 12. TCR be sent back along with copy of this order to the court of ld. CMM, Shahdara, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi. Both parties are directed to appear before trial court on 30.07.2014 at 02:00 PM. File be consigned to record room, as per rules. Announced in the open court (PULASTYA PRAMACHALA) today on 24.07.2014 Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) (This judgment contains nine pages) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Page 9 of 9 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi