Mahesh Yadav vs State Of Uttarakhand And Another on 17 November, 2018 Author: Sharad Kumar Sharma Bench: Sharad Kumar Sharma HIGH COURT OF UTTARAKHAND AT NAINITAL Criminal Revision No. 236 of 2010 Mahesh Yadav .....Revisionist Versus State of Uttarakhand and another ....Respondents Mr. Lokendra Dobhal, Advocate for the revisionist. Mr. Sachin Panwar, Brief Holder for the State of Uttarakhand / respondent No.1 Mr. Pawan Mishra, Advocate for respondent No. 2. Dated: 17th November, 2018 JUDGMENT Hon'ble Sharad Kumar Sharma, J. Before venturing into the factual aspects of the controversy, which emanates from the revisional Court's order dated 2nd November, 2010, which is under challenged in the present Criminal Revision, it becomes necessary to formulate issues which are required to be dealt with by this Court so as to come to a rationale conclusion for the basis of resolving the issue raised and for rendering the judgment. The issues as required to be dealt with is : 1. Whether the proceeding under Section 133 of the Cr.P.C., are a proceeding of a criminal nature which would bar filing of a recall application in view of the restriction imposed by the provision contained under Sections 362 of the Cr.P.C. 2. If Section 133 Cr.P.C. proceedings are treated to be a civil and summary proceedings, whether that would permit the filing of the recall application, seeking recall of the ex parte order passed in the proceedings. 2. The facts, as narrated in the instant case, are that the property, in question, constitutes to be land lying in Khat No. 685, bearing Khasra No. 14-A, having an area of 0.0120 hectares, which has been now numbered as new Khasra No. 14 Ya (14/2), hereinafter, 2 to be referred as a disputed property, which is claimed by respondent to be a public passage. 3. Whereas, on the other hand, the revisionist has a case that initially, the property, in question, stood recorded with its buhmidhar called as Satya Prakash. The claim of the revisionist before this Court is that recorded owner Satya Prakash, by virtue of a registered sale deed dated 08.04.2002, executed in his favour, had sold certain land to him and, as a result thereto, on the strength of the sale deed executed in his favour, he got himself recorded in the revenue records and, by virtue of an order passed by the Naib Tehsildar in Case No. 1859 dated 19th September, 2002, the revisionist's name stood recorded as Shreni 1 ka, i.e. bhumidhar with transferable right. In support of the aforesaid contentions, he had placed on record the khatuni pertaining to fasli year 1416 to 1421. 4. On 10th December, 2004, father of respondent No. 2, late Mr. Chote Lal, had initiated the proceedings by invoking Section 133 of the Cr.P.C. by filing an application to the said effect before the Sub Divisional Magistrate, wherein, he has prayed for that the land which is shown to have been purchased by the revisionist, as a matter of fact, is a public passage, on which, an obstruction is being sought to be created by the present revisionist, and hence, by invoking the powers under Section 133 Cr.P.C., have prayed Sub Divisional Officer that the revisionist may be restrained from raising any obstructions and further, in case, if the obstructions have already been raised, the same may be removed forthwith. 5. Taking cognizance to the said application, the Sub Divisional Magistrate, has called for a report from the S.H.O. Clementown, Dehradun, who investigated the matter and submitted the report on 11th December, 2004, wherein, he submitted his inspection report, in which, he reported that on an investigation made in the locality, in question, the so called passage was shown to have been completely 3 blocked. On the basis of the report, Sub Divisional Magistrate passed a preliminary order on 14th December, 2004, wherein, Sub Divisional Officer issued a direction to the revisionist to remove the obstructions within a period of fifteen days or show cause by 28th December, 2004. It is, at this stage, the actual controversy germinates because the so called notice which was sent by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, on 14th December, 2004, is said to have not been served upon the present revisionist and, hence, he contends that the entire proceedings taken after the submission of the report by predecessor of respondent No. 2 by filing application under Section 133 Cr.P.C. on 10.12.2004 was ex parte against him. To fortify the fact that the proceedings drawn under Section 133 at the behest of respondent No. 2 ex parte, he has also placed on record an annexure No. 6, which is the mode of service adopted by the respondent by way of affixation on the notice on the shop which is witnessed by two persons who had made the endorsement of the affixation. 6. The arguments of the learned counsel for the revisionist and the case as pleaded and argued in the present recall application, as well as in the revision is that as a matter of fact, the service by affixation was a collusive service which was resorted to by the respondent No. 2 in collusion with the Police Officials of Choki Defence Colony, Clemnetown and a fake report of service has been obtained and submitted to the Sub Divisional Magistrate. 7. The S.D.M., while acting on the report, given by the police officials regarding the service of notice had treated the service to be sufficient and had proceeded to pass the final orders on 29th January, 2005, whereby, directing the revisionist to remove the so called obstructions as reported by the S.H.O. in his report dated 11th December, 2004, lest failing which, the Sub Divisional Magistrate, directed that a penal action as provided under Section 188 I.P.C. would be taken against him. 4 8. It was when based on the order dated 29th January, 2005 that the steps were taken to remove the obstructions by the agency deployed by the S.D.M. on 11th February, 2005. The revisionist contends that he could get the knowledge of the order dated 29th January, 2005 as well as mode of its service of notice dated 14th December, 2004 at a later stage, which necessitated for him to file Recall Application seeking recall of the order dated 29th January, 2005 and 11th February, 2005. The Recall Application, as filed by the revisionist, on 18th February, 2005, was opposed on the ground that since the proceedings which has been drawn under Section 133 Cr.P.C. being proceedings contemplated under the Cr.P.C., no review or recall would be maintainable in view of the implications of provisions contained under Section 362 of the Cr.P.C. 9. The Sub Divisional Magistrate, while considering the recall application and the mode, in which, the notices were served being satisfied for the ground taken in the recall application, have proceeded to drop the proceedings by an order dated 3rd March, 2006. Being aggrieved against this order, the respondent No. 2, preferred a Criminal Revision No. 19 of 2006, Chotte Lal Vs. State of Uttarakhand and others and the same has been allowed by the impugned order dated 2nd November, 2010 under challenge in revision and, consequent thereto, has set aside the dated 03.03.2006 and as result thereof the order 29th January, 2005 and 11th February, 2005 directing the revisionist to remove the obstructions was maintained. 10. The revisionist, in the present revision, has laid multi-fold arguments while giving challenge to the impugned order dated 02.11.2010 and one of the basic ground being that the view taken by the revisional court while allowing the revision and setting aside the order dated 03.03.2010 was that recall would not be tenable, this argument is argued to be not sustainable because he submits that the proceedings of the nature of 133 Cr.P.C . partakes the shape of that of being a civil proceedings and if that be so, if it is a civil proceedings 5 of summary nature then any order passed can be recalled by the Authorities passing the same. 11. While, on the other hand, the argument which has been extended by Mr. Pawan Mishra, learned counsel for the respondents is that the said argument of the learned counsel for the revisionist that the proceedings under Section 133 Cr.P.C. takes the shape of civil proceedings may not be tenable for the reasons that once initiation of the proceedings itself is contemplated under the provisions of Cr.P.C . right from the inception, it would be of criminal nature and thus, merely because of its interpretation given by Court of law that it is a summary in nature and it deals with the properties, it will not provide it a flavour or blend of being a civil nature and thus, he submits that the order impugned dated 2nd November, 2010, as passed by learned Additional District Judge / F.T.C. II, Dehradun in Criminal Revision No. 19 of 2006, Chhote Lal Vs. State of Uttarakhand and others do not call for any interference. 12. In response to the argument of revisionist, Mr. Pawan Mishra, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2, to support his contentions that recall application would not be maintainable has placed reliance upon a judgment rendered by the Coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Rustam Vs. Manfair and another reported in 2006 (2) U.D., 597, wherein, he, while referring to the contents of para 5 and 6 of the judgment, which are quoted hereunder, he submits that Coordinate Bench has specifically drawn a distinction that once it happens to be the proceedings under Section 133 Cr.P.C., in that eventuality, the embargo created by Section 362 will come into place and it would render the recall application, on which, the order dated 03.03.2010 was passed as not tenable, consequently, based on the said ratio, revision deserves to be dismissed . Para 6 and 7 of the judgment reads as under :- "6. The only point in this revision is that whether the Magistrate who had made the order absolute u/s 133 Cr.P.C. 6 and directed the revisionist to remove the obstruction from the pathway can be set aside and restored for the hearing again under the Cr.P.C . It is also to be decided that once the proceedings had been terminated in favour of the respondent whether that proceedings can be set aside by subsequent order. Section 362 of the Cr.P.C. provides as under : "Court not to alter judgment. - Save as otherwise provided by this Code or by any other law for the time being in force, no Court, when it has signed its judgment or final order disposing of a case, shall alter or review the same except to correct a clerical or arithmetical errors." 7. Perusal of the above provision clearly reveals that once a judgment and order is delivered or order is signed, it cannot be altered except clerical errors. The learned Sessions Judge was justified in holding that the learned Magistrate erred in setting aside the order dated 04-01-1996. The revisionist had only the remedy to file the revision or to take any appropriate steps under Cr.P.C . against the order passed by the learned Magistrate u/s 136 Cr.P.C. I do not find any illegality in the judgment and order passed by the learned Sessions Judge." 13. In response to it, the learned counsel for the revisionist submits that the argument as extended by the learned counsel for the respondents may not hold water because of the fact that looking to the nature of the provisions and, in particular, the intention of Section 133 Cr.P.C., it is intended to protect a public nuisance over a public property, and for the said purpose, the power is to be exercised under the said provisions, have been vested upon with the District Magistrate / S.D.M. Hence, it takes the shape of an exercise of an executive power, hence, it takes the shape of civil proceedings. Even otherwise also, if the language of Section 133 Cr.P.C. is read in precision, its intention was to refrain a person from creating any obstacle and public nuisance affecting the interest of the public at large. It does not give it a blend of a criminal act, as it is an action of an individual over a public landed property, not a act of offence on an individual. 14. However, the explanation given under Section 133 Cr.P.C. makes the applicability of Section 133 Cr.P.C. only in relation to the 7 property which falls to be within the domain of public place and would not apply to the property which otherwise happens to be an exclusively purchased property of an individual from hi own sources and is recorded as private property and, accordingly, recorded in the revenue records with the said status. Hence, as already referred above , herein, the revisionist is the purchaser of the property by virtue of the registered sale deed dated 8th April, 2002, and he stands recorded in the revenue record after due proceedings under Land Revenue Act, 1901 , which is apparent from the khatuni pertaining to the 1416 to 1421 fasli. Thus, this Court is of the view that once the property falls to be as to be private property, lying in Shreni 1-Ka under Section 129 (1) of the Z.A. & L.R. Act in shreni 1-Ka, it will be excluded by the explanation contained under Section 133 Cr.P.C. would be excluded. Thus, as a matter of fact, the proceedings ought not to have been drawn by lodging a complaint under Section 133 of the Cr.P.C. by invoking the said provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure , 1973. 15. Reverting back to the objection taken by Mr. Pawan Mishra, learned counsel for respondent No. 2, with regard to the tenability of the recall application, the learned counsel for the revisionist submits that the procedure as contemplated for dealing with the proceedings under Section 133 Cr.P.C. does not entail undergoing a long drawn process by leading extended evidence of the respective parties as required in regular civil proceedings, having rival claim over the subject matter and if that be so, the proceedings under Section 133 Cr.P.C., would be a summary proceedings and having said so that it would be of a civil nature, in that eventuality, the recall application seeking recall of the order passed under Section 133 Cr.P.C. would be maintainable. 16. In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the revisionist has placed reliance in the case of Vasant Manga Nikumba and others Vs. Baburao Bhikanna Naidu and another 8 reported in 1996 SCC (Cri) 27, wherein, the Hon'ble Apex Court in para 3 has laid as under :- "3. Nuisance is an inconvenience materially interferes with the ordinary physical comfort of human existence. It is not capable of precise definition. It may be public or private nuisance. As defined in Section 268 IPC, public nuisance is an offence against public either by doing a thing which tends to the annoyance of the whole community in general or by neglect to do anything which the common good requires. It is an act or omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in general who dwell or occupy the property in the vicinity. On the alternative it causes injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use public right. It is the quantum of annoyance or discomfort in contra distinction to private nuisance which affects an individual is the decisive factor. The object and public purpose behind Section 133 is to prevent public nuisance that if the Magistrate fails to take immediate recourse to Section 133 irreparable damage would be done to the public. The exercise of the power should be one of judicious discretions objectively exercised on pragmatic consideration of the given facts and circumstances from evidence on record. The proceedings under Section 133 is not intended to settle private disputes or a substitute to settle civil disputes though the proceeding under Section 133 is more in the nature of civil proceedings in a summary nature." 17. In its categorical terms, the Hon'ble Apex Court held that the proceedings under Section 133 Cr.P.C. is of civil nature and is summary in nature. 18. Identical ratio has been laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Kachrulal Bhagirath Agrawal and others Vs. State of Maharashtra and others reported in (2005) 9 SCC 36, particularly, the ratio which has been propounded by the Hon'ble Apex Court in para 10 of the said judgment , which is rather reiterated the principles that it would be a civil proceeding. "10*. A proceeding under Section 133 is of a summary nature. It appears as a part of Chapter X of the Code which relates to maintenance of public order and tranquillity. The chapter has been classified into four categories. Sections 129 to 132 come under the category of "unlawful assemblies". Sections 133 to 143 come under the category of "public 9 nuisance". Section 144 comes under the category of "urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger" and the last category covers Sections 145 to 149 relating to "disputes as to immovable property". Nuisances are of two kinds i.e. (i) public; and (ii) private. "Public nuisance" or "common nuisance" as defined in Section 268 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short " IPC ") is an offence against the public either by doing a thing which tends to the annoyance of the whole community in general or by neglecting to do anything which the common good requires. It is an act or omission which causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity. "Private nuisance" on the other hand, affects some individuals as distinguished from the public at large. The remedies are of two kinds -- civil and criminal. The remedies under the civil law are of two kinds. One is under Section 91 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (in short " CPC "). Under it a suit lies and the plaintiffs need not prove that they have sustained any special damage. The second remedy is a suit by a private individual for a special damage suffered by him. There are three remedies under the criminal law. The first relates to the prosecution under Chapter XIV of IPC . The second provides for summary proceedings under Sections 133 to 144 of the Code, and the third relates to remedies under special or local laws. Sub-section (2) of Section 133 postulates that no order duly made by a Magistrate under this section shall be called in question in any civil court. The provisions of Chapter X of the Code should be so worked as not to become themselves a nuisance to the community at large. Although every person is bound to so use his property that it may not work legal damage or harm to his neighbour, yet on the other hand, no one has a right to interfere with the free and full enjoyment by such person of his property, except on clear and absolute proof that such use of it by him is producing such legal damage or harm. Therefore, a lawful and necessary trade ought not to be interfered with unless it is proved to be injurious to the health or physical comfort of the community. Proceedings under Section 133 are not intended to settle private disputes between different members of the public. They are in fact intended to protect the public as a whole against inconvenience. A comparison between the provisions of Sections 133 and 144 of the Code shows that while the former is more specific, the latter is more general. Therefore, nuisance specially provided for in the former section is taken out of the general provisions of the latter section. The proceedings under Section 133 are more in the nature of civil proceedings than of criminal nature. Section 133(1)(b) relates to trade or occupation which is injurious to health or physical comfort. It itself deals with physical comfort to the community and not with those acts which are not in themselves nuisance but in the course of which public nuisance 10 is committed. In order to bring a trade or occupation within the operation of this section, it must be shown that the interference with public comfort was considerable and a large section of the public was affected injuriously. The word "community" in clause (b) of Section 133(1) cannot be taken to mean residents of a particular house. It means something wider, that is, the public at large or the residents of an entire locality. The very fact that the provision occurs in a chapter with "public nuisance" is indicative of this aspect. It would, however, depend on the facts situation of each case and it would be hazardous to lay down any straitjacket formula." 19. Lastly, the learned counsel for the revisionist has placed reliance in the case of State of M.P. Vs. Kedia Leather & Liquor Ltd. And others reported in 2003 SCC (Cri) 1642, wherein, in para 8 and 9 the Court has held as under : "7. Learned counsel for the appellant State submitted that the view expressed by the High Court is not legally tenable. The three statutes operate in different fields and even though there may be some amount of overlapping, they can coexist. A statutory provision cannot be held to have been repealed impliedly by the court. Learned counsel for the respondent units submitted that this Court had occasion to pass interim orders on 2-1-2001. Exception was taken to the manner of functioning of the Madhya Pradesh Pollution Control Board (in short "the Board") and directions were given to take necessary action against the delinquent officials. Proceedings were initiated and on the basis of the reports filed by the functionaries of the reconstituted Board, functioning of the factories had been discontinued. The legality of the proceedings and the orders passed therein have been questioned and the Board has been moved for grant of necessary permission for making the factories functional. In this background it is submitted that the issues raised have really become academic. Though, learned counsel for the appellant State and the Board accepted the position to be factually true, it is submitted that considering the impact of the decision which would have far-reaching consequences, the legal issues may be decided and appropriate directions should be given so far as the aspect of functioning or closure of the factories is concerned. 8. Section 133 of the Code appears in Chapter X of the Code which deals with maintenance of public order and tranquillity. It is a part of the heading "Public nuisance". The term "nuisance" as used in law is not a term capable of exact definition and it has been pointed out in Halsbury's Laws of England that: "even in the present day there is not entire agreement as to whether certain acts or omissions shall be classed as nuisances 11 or whether they do not rather fall under other divisions of the law of tort". In Vasant Manga Nikumba v. Baburao Bhikanna Naidu , 1996 SCC (Cri) 27, it was observed that nuisance is an inconvenience which materially interferes with the ordinary physical comfort of human existence. It is not capable of precise definition. To bring in application of Section 133 of the Code, there must be imminent danger to the property and consequential nuisance to the public. The nuisance is the concomitant act resulting in danger to the life or property due to likely collapse etc. The object and purpose behind Section 133 of the Code is essentially to prevent public nuisance and involves a sense of urgency in the sense that if the Magistrate fails to take recourse immediately irreparable damage would be done to the public. It applies to a condition of the nuisance at the time when the order is passed and it is not intended to apply to future likelihood or what may happen at some later point of time. It does not deal with all potential nuisance, and on the other hand applies when the nuisance is in existence. It has to be noted that sometimes there is confusion between Section 133 and Section 144 of the Code. While the latter is a more general provision the former is more specific. While the order under the former is conditional, the order under the latter is absolute. The proceedings are more in the nature of civil proceedings than criminal proceedings." 20. Hence, in view of the ratio as laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court, it leads to an inevitable conclusion that the proceedings under Section 133 of the Cr.P.C. since being summary in nature dealing with the curbing and curtailing of nuisance on a public property and, since it has been held out to be a civil nature and being a power which has been exercised by the executive authorities, as contained under Section 133 Cr.P.C., itself, it will be a civil proceeding and if that be so, then obviously under the civil laws, the authorities passing an order in ex parte manner, will himself have an inherent power to recall the order which has been passed ex parte to meet the ends of justice and also to have an effective contested adjudication. 21. Consequently, this Court holds that the order dated 03.03.2010, as passed by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, on the recall application of the revisionist, seeking recall of the ex parte order did not suffer from any apparent legal vices. As such, the present revision is 12 allowed. The impugned order dated 02.11.2010, passed by the learned Additional District Judge / F.T.C. II, Dehradun in Criminal Revision No. 19 of 2006, Chhote Lal Vs. State of Uttarakhand and other is quashed. 22. However, there would be no order as to costs. (Sharad Kumar Sharma, J.) 17.11.2018 Shiv