Shivangi Goel @ Shivangi Bansal vs State Of Nct Delhi on 27 September, 2023 1. IN THE COURT OF SH. JITENDRA SINGH : ASJ (ELECTRICITY), NORTH WEST DISTRICT : ROHINI COURTS, DELHI Cr. Rev. 333/2023 Shivangi Goel @ Shivangi Bansal Vs. State of N.C.T. Delhi & another 27.09.2023 ORDER 1. Vide this order, I shall dispose of the criminal revision petition under Section 397 of The Code of Criminal Procedure . (hereinafter referred to as 'Code') for setting aside the summoning order dated 13.04.2023 passed by Ld. CMM, North-West, Rohini Courts, Delhi in complaint case No. 8101/2022 titled as Mukesh Bansal Vs. Shivangi Goel @ Shivangi Bansal for summoning the revisionist under Section 500 & 501 Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as ' IPC '). Allegations as mentioned in the complaint for the offence of criminal defamation:- 2. Briefly stated, it is the case of the complainant that the accused has committed criminal defamation by publishing imputation intending to harm the reputation of the complainant. It is alleged that the accused has published defamatory speeches and comments against the complainant on various social media platforms. It is further alleged that the accused is daughter in law of the complainant and due to matrimonial dispute she has registered a false FIR bearing no. 567/2018, PS: 2. Pilakhuwa, District Hapur, UP, wherein the complainant was discharged by the Hon'ble High Court of Allahabad. It is further alleged that the accused has approached the friends and well wishers of the complainant and stated that the complainant is a character less person and has tried to commit rape against her, which has harmed the reputation of the complainant in the society. Submissions by Ld. Counsel for the Revisionist:- 3. It is submitted by the Ld. Counsel for the revisionist that u/s. 202 (1) of the Code any Magistrate, on receiving a complaint of an offence, which he is authorized to take cognizance, he shall in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercise his jurisdiction shall postpone the issue of process against the accused and either inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by the police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit. It is further submitted that Ld. CMM has not complied with the mandatory provisions of Section 202(1) of the Code before issuing the process to the revisionist/accused. It is further submitted that the accused is protected under exception iv attached to Section 499 of IPC. Ld. Counsel for the revisionist is relied upon the judgment(s) titled as (a) Dilip Kumar vs. Brajraj Shrivastava, Criminal Appeal no. 561 of 2012, ( b) Surendra Mohan Vikal Vs. Ascharaj Lal Chopra , 1978 SCR (3) 434, ( c) M.C. Verghese vs. T.J. Ponnan & Anr. 1970 AIR 1876, (d) Shalini Mehta alias Shalu vs. Dr. J.L. Mehta (1993) 3 RCR (Cri.) 589, 1993 SCC and (e) M/s. Pepsi Foods Ltd. & Anr. vs. Special Judicial Magistrate & ors. (1998) 5 SCC 749. 3. Submissions by the Ld. Counsel for the respondent no. 2:- 4. It is submitted by the Ld. Counsel for the respondent no. 2 that the impugned order does not suffer from any illegality as the complaint discloses commission of offence for which she has been summoned. Ld. Counsel for the respondent no. 2 is relied upon the judgment titled as (1) Vijay Dhanuka etc. versus Najima Mamtaj etc. Crl. Appeal Nos. 678-681 of 2014, (Special Leave Petition (Crl.) Nos. 5090-5093 of 2013), (2) Raj Kumar Singh and 2 other Vs. State of UP and another, Application u/s. 482 No. 1183 of 2021, (3) Jagdish Chander @ Gurbachan Singh Vs. Satnam Singh and others , CRR 770-2014, (4) Sonu Gupta Vs. Deepak Gupta & Ors. Criminal Appeal Nos. 285-287 of 2015 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) Nos. 300-302 of 2013 and (5) Sau. Kamal Shivaji Pokarnekar Vs. The State of Maharashtra & ors. Criminal Appeal No. 255 of 2019 (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 7513 of 2014). Grounds of revision:- 5. The impugned order has been challenged by the revisionist on two grounds:- Firstly, that the accused resides at the place outside the jurisdiction of the Ld. MM concerned and therefore, it was mandatory to conduct inquiry u/s. 202 (1) of the Code. Secondly, that there were no sufficient grounds to proceed against the accused. The Position in Law:- 6. As per the Section 202 (1) of the Code wherein the accused is residing beyond the area in which the Ld. MM exercise his jurisdiction before issuing the process, the Magistrate has to exercise the following 4. options:- (1) The Magistrate may inquire the matter himself and if he inquires the matter himself, he may record the statements of the witnesses on oath, or (2) He may direct an investigation to be made by a police officer, or (3) He may direct an investigation to be made by such person other than police officer. 7. The provision of Section 202 (1) of th Code as amended with effect from 23.06.2006, the requirement is that in those cases where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which the concerned Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, it is mandatory on the part of Magistrate to conduct an inquiry or investigation before issuing the process. That means, in case, if such an inquiry is not conducted in cases where the accused resides at a place beyond the area in which the Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, the purpose of amendment in Section 202 (1) of the Code would frustrate. 8. The essence of purpose of amendment has been captured by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Vijay Dhanuka v. Najima Mamtaj , reported in (2014) 14 SCC 638: "11. Section 202 of the Code, inter alia, contemplates postponement of the issue of the process "in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction" and thereafter to either inquire into the case by himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit. In the face of it, what needs our determination is as to whether in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which the Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, inquiry is mandatory or not. 5. 12. The words "and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction" were inserted by Section 19 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act (Central Act 25 of 2005) w.e.f. 23-6-2006. The aforesaid amendment, in the opinion of the legislature, was essential as false complaints are filed against persons residing at far off places in order to harass them. The note for the amendment reads as follows: "False complaints are filed against persons residing at far off places simply to harass them. In order to see that innocent persons are not harassed by unscrupulous persons, this clause seeks to amend sub- section (1) Section 202 to make it obligatory upon the Magistrate that before summoning the accused residing beyond his jurisdiction he shall enquire into the case himself or direct investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit, for finding out whether or not there was sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused." The use of the expression "shall" prima facie makes the inquiry or the investigation, as the case may be, by the Magistrate mandatory. The word "shall" is ordinarily mandatory but sometimes, taking into account the context or the intention, it can be held to be directory. The use of the word "shall" in all circumstances is not decisive. Bearing in mind the aforesaid principle, when we look to the intention of the legislature, we (2014) 14 SCC 638 find that it is aimed to prevent innocent persons from harassment by unscrupulous persons from false complaints. "...Hence, in our opinion, the use of expression "shall" and the background and the purpose for which the amendment has been brought, we have no doubut in our mind that inquiry or the investigation, as the case may be, is mandatory before summons are issued against the accused living beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate. In view of the decision of this Court in the case of Udai Shankar Awasthi v. State of Uttar Pradesh , (2013) 2 SCC 435, this point need not 6. detain us any further as in the said case, this Court has clearly held that the provision aforesaid is mandatory. It is apt to reproduce the following passage from the said judgment : "40. The Magistrate had issued summons without meeting the mandatory requirement of Section 202 Cr.P.C., though the appellants were outside his territorial jurisdiction. The provisions of Section 202 Cr.P.C. were amended vide the Amendment Act, 2005 , making it mandatory to postpone the issue of process where the accused resides in an area beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the Magistrate concerned. The same was found necessary in order to protect innocent persons from being harassed by unscrupulous persons and making it obligatory upon the Magistrate to enquire into the case himself, or to direct investigation to be made by a police officer, or by such other person as he thinks fit for the purpose of finding out whether or not, there was sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused before issuing summons in such cases." (underlining ours) In view of our answer to the aforesaid question, the next question which falls for our determination is whether the learned Magistrate before issuing summons has held the inquiry s mandated under Section 202 of the Code. The word "inquiry" has been defined under Section 2 (g) of the Code, the same reads as follows: "2. xxx xxx xxx (g) "inquiry" means every inquiry, other than a trial, conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or Court..". 9. Similar view has been taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Abhijir Pawar v. Hemant Madhukar Nimbalkar and another , (2017) 2 SCC 528. The relevant para of the aforesaid judgment is as under:- "...Admitted position in law is that in those cases where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which the Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, it is 7. mandatory on the part of the Magistrate to conduct an enquiry or investigation before issuing the process. Section 202 Cr.P.C. was amended in the year 2005 by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005, with effect from 22-6-2006 by adding the words ?and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction?. There is a vital purpose or objective behind this amendment, namely, to ward off false complaints against such persons residing at a far-off places in order to save them from unnecessary harassment. Thus, the amended provision casts an obligation on the Magistrate to conduct enquiry or direct investigation before issuing the process, so that false complaints are filtered and rejected. The aforesaid purpose is specifically mentioned in the note appended to the Bill proposing the said amendment.". Inquiry under Section 202 (1) of the Code:- 10. As per provisions of Section 202(1) of the Code the inquiry or investigation, as the case may be, is mandatory before summons are issued against the accused living beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned Magistrate. 11. The scope of inquiry as contemplated under Section 202 (1) of the Code is limited to find out the truth or falsehood of the complaint in order to determine the question of the issue of process on the material placed by the complainant before the Court and to find out whether prime facie case for issue of process has been made out and for deciding the said question it has to be from the point of view of the complaint without at all adverting to any defence that the accused may have. In fact it is well settled that the proceedings under Section 202 (1) of the Code, the accused has got absolutely no locus standi and is not 8. entitled to be heard on the question whether the process should be issued against him or not. Reliance is placed upon the judgment titled as Nagawwa vs. Veeranna Shivalingappa Nonjalgi , 1976 SCC rR 313 (SC). Findings:- 12. Now, the question which falls for determination is whether the Ld. MM before issuing summons has held inquiry as mandated under Section 202 (1) of the Code ? Admittedly, the revisionist resides beyond territorial jurisdiction of the Ld. CMM concerned. Therefore, as per Section 202 (1) of the Code, the Magistrate is required to postpone issuing the process against the accused and inquire into the case himself or direct investigation to be made by the police officer or by such other person as he thinks fit. 13. Trial Court Record reveals that the complainant in the present matter was examined on 12.12.2022. After the examination of the complainant the matter was adjourned and thereafter, Sh. Numit Sabbarwal was examined as CW-2 and Sh. Surender Sethi was examined as CW-3 on 24.01.2023. As per section 202 (2) of the Code for the purpose of inquiry Magistrate can examine witnesses on oath for ascertaining whether there is evidence in support of the complaint so as to justify the issue of process and commencement of proceedings against the accused. It is apparent that inquiry as envisaged under Section 202 (1) of the Code has been conducted by the Ld. MM as he has examined apart from the complainant two other witnesses namely Sh. Numit Sabbarwal and Sh. Surender Sethi. Reliance is placed upon 9. the judgment of Vijay Dhankuka (supra). The relevant extract is reproduced below for ready reference:- "...It is evident from the aforesaid provision, every inquiry other than a trial conducted by the Magistrate or Court is an inquiry. No specific mode or manner of inquiry is provided under Section 202 of the Code. In the inquiry envisaged under Section 202 of the Code, the witnesses are examined whereas under Section 200 of the Code, examination of the complainant only is necessary with the option of examining the witnesses present, if any. This exercise by the Magistrate, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, is nothing but an inquiry envisaged under Section 202 of the Code. In the present case, as we have stated earlier, the Magistrate has examined the complainant on solemn affirmation and the two witnesses and only thereafter he had directed for issuance of process...". 14. Both the said witnesses has categorically deposed that the accused has levelled allegations of rape and harassment which made us to believe that the complainant is a wrong person and resulted in lowering of reputation of the complainant in our eyes. The relevant extract of the examination of CW-2 and CW-3 respectively are reproduced below for ready reference:- "CW-2....In the month of October, 2018, I came to know that some family dispute was going on the family of Mukesh Bansal between his son and daughter I law. Thereafter, in the end of October 2018 or in starting of November 2018 Shivangi Goel (daughter in law of Mukesh Bansal) and Rajesh Goel (father of Shivangi Goel) approached me and other persons of the society and stated that Mukesh Bansal is a Character Less Person who alongwith his son namely Chirag Bansal has tried to do wrong act (rape) with Shivangi Goel and also levled other allegations of dowry etc. and with regard to the same he has also shown me and other members of the 10. society Video clippings on youtube and newspaper cuttings. After seeing the same, me and other persons of the society realised that Mukesh Bansal is a character less and wrong personof the society and Mukesh Bansal does not deserve any social respect of the society. Because of their representation we have changed our mind towards Mukesh Bansal and started keeping distance from Mukesh Bansal and his family. We stopped inviting him at social gathering. I also stopped doing business with Mukesh Bansal.... CW-3...In the month of November 2018, I came to know that some family dispute was going on in the family of Mukesh Bansal between his son and daughter in law. Thereafter, in the ned of November 2018 Shivani Goel (daughter in law of Mukesh Bansal) and Rajesh Goel (father of Shivangi Goel) approached me at Azad Market and other persons of the society and stated that Mukesh Bansal and his son namely Chirag Bansal has tried to commit rape with Shivangi Goel and further leveled other allegations of harassment. They also shown me the video clippings on their mobile phone which was uploaded on youtube. They also circulated the said video leveling false allegations against Mukesh Bansal to me as well as other persons of the society. I hare received the said video on my whatsapp number 9312670975 and the same was also circulated in the entire society business circle/business association group. After seeing the same, me and other persons of the society made us to believe that Mukesh Bansal is a wrong person of the society and he does not deserve any respect in the society. Because of their representation we have changed our mind towards Mukesh Bansal and started keeping distance from him and stopped doing business with him. We stopped inviting him at social gathering....". 15. It is well settled that at the stage of taking cognizance of offences in a complaint case, it is impermissible to go into the truthfulness or otherwise of the allegations made in the complaint and one has to proceed on a footing that the allegations made are true. Reliance is placed upon the judgment titled as Gambhirsinh R.Dekara Vs. Fhalgunbhai Chimanbhai Patel , AIR 2013 SC 1590. Moreover, there is no legal requirement imposed on a Magistrate for passing 11. detailed order while issuing summons. The evidence is adequate for supporting the conviction, can be determined only at the trial and not at the stage of inquiry. Reliance is placed upon the judgment titled as Bushan Kumar Vs. State NCT of Delhi, AIR 2012 SC 1747. 16. The impugned order reflects that Ld. CMM has applied his mind to the facts of the case and has also examined the nature of allegations made in complaint and the evidence in support thereof. The impugned order is correct in the eyes of law and does not demand any interference from this Court. Accordingly the revision petition stands dismissed. 17. The revision file be consigned to record room after due compliance. TCR alongwith the copy of this order be sent to the Court concerned. 18. Copy of this order be given dasti. Digitally signed by JITENDRA JITENDRA SINGH SINGH Date: 2023.09.27 16:26:12 +0530 Announced in the open court (JITENDRA SINGH) today i.e. on 27.09.2023 ASJ(Electricity)/Distt. North-West Rohini Courts, Delhi, 27.09.2023