Sushil Kumari vs . Brijesh Kumari on 30 October, 2021 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari IN THE COURT OF SH. MUNEESH GARG, ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE (SHAHDARA), KKD COURTS DELHI. CC NO. 11327/2016 PS : Anand Vihar U/S 500/504/506 IPC Sushil Kumari ............. Complainant Vs. Brijesh Kumari ............. Accused a) ID No. of the case : 11327/2016 b) Date of Institution : 05.02.2016 c) Name of complainant : Sushil Kumari, W/o Sh. Surender Kumar R/o Quarter No. A-4, Railway Single Story, Anand Vihar, Delhi-110092. d) Name & address of accused : Brijesh Kumari, W/o Sh. Rishi Kumar, R/o Quarter No. A-2, Railway Single Story, Anand Vihar, Delhi-110092. e) The offence charged with : U/s 500 IPC f) The plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty g) Order reserved on : 29.09.2021 h) Final order : Acquitted i) The date of pronouncement : 30.10.2021 CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 1/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari JUDGMENT 1. The gist of the case of the complainant is that the complainant is working as a Chief Matron with the Northern Railway at Railway Health Unit/Centre, Anand Vihar, Delhi. The accused is residing in the adjoining quarter of the complainant i.e. A-2, Railway Single Storey, Anand Vihar, Delhi. Complainant alleged that accused is an ill-tempered and quarrelsome lady who used to quarrel with the complainant on petty issues. The accused has been coming to the Railway Health Unit/Centre with an ill intention and ill motive on the pretext for getting some injections, to provoke the complainant. The accused raised wide and grave allegations/imputation against complainant with the senior officers stating that complainant has injected empty syringes without any medicine to her. The said allegations were levelled only to malign, defame and lower down her reputation in the eyes of her colleagues, seniors and doctors working in the Railway Health Unit/Centre. Complainant further alleged that accused lodged one false, fabricated and concocted written complaint dated 10.06.2015 against her to the senior, DMO, Railway Health Unit/Centre, Anand Vihar, Delhi with intention to harm the reputation of the complainant. Complainant alleged that due to imputation and CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 2/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari allegations made by the accused, the reputation of complainant has been tarnished. Complainant made written submission to the senior DMO, Railway Health Unit/Centre, Anand Vihar, Delhi on 17.06.2015 and also on many occasions regarding false allegations made by the accused. It is also stated that true fact is that accused has been putting pressure on the complainant to give injections at her home/quarter and also demanded five empty syringes for which complainant categorically refused stating that she cannot give syringes as well as injections at her residence without permission of the doctor and advised the accused to seek written permission of the doctor which irritated the accused and she made false imputation against the complainant to lower her reputation. The complainant also served a legal notice dated 19.10.2015 to the accused through her counsel. Accused sent reply of the legal notice on 05.11.2015 levelling false and fabricated allegations against the complainant and her husband. Hence, the complainant filed the present complaint case for offences u/s 500 / 504 / 506 IPC against the accused. 2. In the pre-summoning evidence, complainant examined herself as CW1. Thereafter, she closed her pre- summoning evidence. Vide order dated 03.06.2017, CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 3/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari accused was summoned to face the trial of the offence falling u/s 500 IPC. 3. After compliance with Section 207 Cr.P.C., notice was framed against the accused, to which she pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 4. In support of her case, complainant has examined two witnesses to prove the allegations. A brief scrutiny of complainant's evidence is recorded as under: Complainant examined herself as CW-1. She supported her complaint and deposed that on 27.05.2015, she was posted as Chief Matron at Health Unit, Anand Vihar and accused visited her and was administered injection. On 29.05.2011, patient accused again visited her for injection and further asked her to visit home of the accused for giving injection. Complainant told accused to bring written permission from senior DMO for this purpose and on this, accused asked her for syringes. Complainant again advised accused to take permission for it from senior DMO. On this, accused got annoyed and left her room. CW-1 injected injections to accused on alternative days till 10.06.2015, as per her prescription. On 10.06.2015, CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 4/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari accused made complaint i.e. Ex. CW-2/X1 against CW-1 with imputation that injections were not properly injected. Complainant was asked for explanation on the said complaint and she replied to the same and thereafter, served a notice to accused on 19.10.2015 mark B, as she did not get satisfactory response from senior DMO to the reply given by CW-1 i.e. Ex. CW-1/C. Complainant further deposed that she was defamed, mentally harassed and her career and job got at a stake on account false complaint made by accused. She was cross-examined at length by Ld. Counsel for the accused at post notice evidence. CW-2 Dr. Sujata Rai deposed that on 10.06.2015, she was posted as Senior Divisional Medical Officer at Railway Health Unit, Anand Vihar, Delhi (Northern Railway). On that day, she received a written complaint Ex. CW2/X1 from Smt. Brijesh Kumar against Smt. Sushil Kumari, the then Chief Matron, Railway Health Unit, Anand Vihar, Delhi. On the same day, Smt. Sushil Kumari also gave a written complaint against Brijesh Kumari. On 11.06.2015, Chief Medical Superintendent directed her to conduct an enquiry on the complaint of Smt. Brijesh Kumari. On 15.06.2015, she called an explanation from Smt. Sushil Kumari about the incident vide letter dated CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 5/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari 15.06.2015 Ex. CW1/B. On 17.06.2015, Smt. Sushil Kumari submitted her written explanation in the office which is Ex. CW-1/C. The copy of relevant documents in respect of enquiry conducted by CW-2 were exhibited as CW2/X2. CW-2 further testified that two additional Chief Medical Superintendent came from Delhi Main Hospital to conduct enquiry into the matter and she has no knowledge about any action taken against Smt. Sushil Kumari on the basis of enquiry till date. Ld. Counsel for accused cross-examined CW-2 at length. CW-2 admitted in her cross-examination that the conduct of Smt. Sushil Kumari was not good and she used to misbehave with all staff members. She also deposed in her cross- examination that the patients visiting the hospital had also given written complainants to her against the complainant. 5. Thereafter, complainant closed her post-summoning evidence. After closure of evidence of complainant, statement of the accused u/s 313 Code of Criminal Procedure was recorded. Incriminating evidence was put to accused and she was questioned generally on the case. Accused denied all the material and incriminating facts as had come in the deposition of the complainant and other witnesses and she stated that she has been CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 6/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari falsely implicated in the present case. 6. Accused preferred to lead defence evidence, however, she did not examine any witness in defence and closed her defence evidence. Thereafter, matter was fixed for final arguments. 7. I have heard the arguments and perused the record. 8. Section 500 IPC provides for punishment for the offence of defamation, which is defined in Section 499 IPC which read as:- "499. Defemation- Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by sings or by visible representations, makes or, publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. Explanation 1-4 xxxxxxx First Exception to Tenth Exception. Xxxxxxx CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 7/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari 9. The offence of defamation consists of three essential ingredients, namely, (i) making of publishing any imputation concerning any person, (ii) such imputation must have been made by words either spoken or by visible representations, and (iii) such imputation must be made with the intention, to cause harm or with the knowledge or having reasons to believe that it will harm reputation of the person concerned. Therefore, the intention or knowledge to cause harm are the essential ingredients to constitute the offence under Section 499 IPC. 10. Ld. Counsel for accused submitted that accused neither published nor defamed the complainant in public eyes. It is further argued on behalf of accused that she made written complaint in good faith to the Senior officer of complainant who was having lawful authority to redress her grievances against the complainant for her misbehaviour. Hence, she is entitled for the benefit of Eighth Exception. I find merit in the submission of Ld. Defence Counsel. Eighth Exception provides that it is 'not' defamation to prefer, in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who has lawful authority over that person, with respect to the subject matter of accusation. The illustration to this Exception CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 8/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari makes it absolutely clear. It reads:- Illustration:-- If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a servant, to Z's master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z's father - is within this exception." Thus, accusation made in good faith to those who have lawful authority over the person so accused is protected by the exception. Reference in this regard can be made to the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande v. Uttam (1999) 3 SCC. 134 wherein it was held: "The question for consideration is whether the allegations in the complaint read with the report of the Magistrate make out the offence under Section 500 or not. Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code defines the offence of defamation and Section 500 provides the punishment for such offence. Exception 8 to Section 499 clearly indicates that it is not a defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with regard to the subject matter of accusation. The report of the CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 9/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari Treasury Officer clearly indicates that pursuant to the report made by the accused persons against the complainant, a departmental inquiry had been initiated that the complainant was found to be guilty. Under such circumstances, the fact that the accused persons had made a report to the superior officer of the complainant alleging that he had abused to the Treasury Officer in a drunken state which is the gravamen of the present complaint and nothing more, would be covered by exception 8 to Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code. By perusing the allegations made in the complaint petition, we are also satisfied that no case of defamation has been made out." 11. In case titled as Dr. P. Sharma vs. P. S. Popli and Another reported as 2002 I AD (DELHI) 569, the complainant had filed a complaint against the petitioner under Sections 420 / 336 / 338 IPC and the petitioner was summoned as an accused in the said case. Against those summoning orders petitioner had gone up to the Supreme Court and proceedings were ordered to be CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 10/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari quashed by the Supreme Court. In the SLP filed in the Supreme Court, in which the complaint proceedings were quashed, the petitioner had pleaded that complaint filed by the complainant was wholly mischievous and intended to blackmail him. On these averments contained in the SLP, the complainant filed a complaint under Section 500 , IPC alleging that these were defamatory allegations and amounting to an offence under Section 499 and punishable under Section 500 , IPC. The question was as to whether on the basis of such utterance made in the SLP by the petitioner against the complainant, the complainant was within his right to file a complaint under Section 500 , IPC. This Court in the said judgment held that apparently the imputation was preferred in good faith by the petitioner to get the order of summoning quashed and it could not be said to have been made with the intention or knowledge to cause harm to the reputation of the complainant. It was also observed that the allegations were made before the Supreme Court, which undoubtedly had authority over the subject matter in dispute, and, therefore, the case was covered under Exception 8 provided to Section 499 , IPC and no offence was made out and the complaint under Section 500 filed by the respondent was quashed. CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 11/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari 12. I am also enlightened by the judgment of Sardar Gurdial vs. Dr. Sandeep Sharma ILR (2011) 1 Delhi 193 wherein it was observed that reply filed by the respondent in the proceedings initiated by the mother of the petitioner under Section 133 Cr.PC was filed in the Court of law, which had the authority over the subject matter in dispute. The said reply was filed in good faith to get the complaint dismissed. It is not the case of the petitioner that apart from filing the said reply on the record, the same was also circulated to any person, relations or friends so as to treat it as a publication. 13. In the instant case, accused made a complaint against the complainant to the Chief Divisional Medical Officer who has lawful authority over the accused with regard to the subject matter of accusation. There is nothing on record to suggest that accusation was made with a malafide intention. Complainant has not brought on record any clinching evidence to suggest that the complaint made was malicious and made with a view to defame the complainant, apart from her empty oral averment in this regard. Complainant has not even brought on record any document to suggest the final outcome of enquiry conducted on the said complaint. Even otherwise, mere making of complaint to superior CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 12/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari and competent authority to redress the grievance per se, cannot amount to publication. 14. It is not the case of the complainant that apart from the complaint made to the Chief Divisional Medical Officer, the same statement was also circulated to any person, relatives or friends so as to treat it as a publication by the accused. Thus, it cannot be inferred that the accused made the allegations with the intention to defame the complainant in the society. Complainant has not examined any witness regarding the factum of publication of the allegations of the complaint, made to senior medical officer of compliant, to any person, relations or friends of the complainant. The independent witness examined in support of the complainant did not depose that accused published the defamatory content in the society apart from the complaint made to her. Thus, one of the essential ingredients to constitute the offence of defamation i.e. intention to cause the harm is missing and mere filing a complaint to competent authority does not amount to defamation. 15. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the court is of the considered view that the complainant has failed to prove the case against the accused. Accordingly, accused Smt. CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 13/14 Sushil Kumari Vs. Brijesh Kumari Brijesh Kumari stands acquitted for the offence under section 500 IPC. Digitally signed copy of the judgment by uploaded on the official website of the Delhi District Digitally signed Court. MUNEESH by MUNEESH GARG GARG Date: 2021.10.30 15:20:08 +0530 Dictated & Announced (MUNEESH GARG) Open Court on ACMM/Shahdara, KKD Courts, 30.10.2021 Delhi CC NO. 11327/16, PS: Anand Vihar Page 14/14