J.Mullai vs A.Panneerselvam on 7 September, 2018 Author: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan Bench: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT Dated: 07.09.2018 Reserved on : 30.08.2018 Pronounced on : 07.09.2018 CORAM THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE G.K.ILANTHIRAIYAN Crl.O.P.(MD).Nos.14810 of 2012 and M.P(MD).No.1 of 2012 J.Mullai ..Petitioner Vs. A.Panneerselvam ..Respondent PRAYER: These Criminal Original Petition have been filed under Section 482 of Criminal Procedure Code, to call for the records relating to impugned order in S.T.C.No.792 of 2012 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.1, Karur and quash the same. !For Petitioner : Mr.T.Antony Arul ^For Respondents : Mr.S.Ravi :ORDER This quash petition is filed to quash the criminal proceedings in S.T.C.No.792 of 2012 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.1, Karur, which was taken cognizance for the offences under Sections 499 and 500 of I.P.C. against the petitioner. 2.The case of the complainant is that the petitioner in the capacity of Executive Officer of Arulmighu Kalyana Venkatramanaswamy Temple, Thanthonimaai, Karur District has filed suit in O.S.No.54 of 2011 on the file of the District Judge, Karur for declaration and recovery of possession of the suit property against the respondent and others. The suit has been filed with false and frivolous averments. In the plaint, para NO.11 states as follows: ?The 1st defendant's father who was also an advocate held the post of Managing Trustee of the plaintiff temple twice and appears to have played fraud while settlement enquiry was on under the Act 30/1963. The defendants 2 to 25 claims to have purchased portions of suit property. Any alleged alienations by the 1st defendants in favour of the defendants 2 to 25 are void ab-initio and the plaintiff can simply ignore the same and need not the set aside for binding adjudication the defendants 2 to 25 have been impleaded.? The above statement has been made deliberately to cause imputation, harm and injury to the reputation of the respondent's father, who happens to be an Advocate and he had earned lot of reputation in the Society. The said averments in the plaint are deliberate lies and there are neither true nor made in good faith. The petitioner made no attempt to identify whether such a statement is true. The defamatory lines are no way relevant to the issue and made with malafide and malicious intention to bring down the reputation of the respondent's father in the midst of the advocates practising at Karur and other Court staff and also in the public society and hence, the complaint. 3.The said complaint has been taken cognizance in S.T.C.No.792 of 2012 by the learned Judicial Magistrate No.1, Karur for the offence under Sections 499 and 500 of I.P.C. as against the petitioner and it is pending. As against the said complaint, the present criminal original petition has been filed to quash the said complaint. 4.The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has raised the following grounds to quash the complaint against the petitioner: (i)The petitioner has been appointed as Assistant Commissioner of H.R.& C.E. Department and he was directed to hold additional charge as Executive Officer of Sti Kalyana Pasupatheeswaraswamy temple Karur and on the instructions of her department and the administering committee of the temple, in a representative capacity of Idol Sri Kalyana Pasupatheeswaraswamy, Sri Kalyana Pasupatheeswaraswamy Devasthanam, Karur, she filed suits in O.S.Nos.54 and 55 of 2011 before the learned District Judge Karur, for declaration and recovery of possession of the suit properties as against the respondent and others. Since the said suits were not filed on the petitioner's personal capacity, she has nothing to with the said property and absolutely, there is no grievance as against the respondent on her personal capacity. Whoever comes to the post of Assistant Commissioner or Executive Officer to administer the temple will represent the temple. Therefore, she has nothing to do with the plaint averments even assuming that the said averments defame the name of the respondent's father. (ii)The alleged averments made in para 11 of the plaint that the father of the respondent played fraud during the settlement enquiry made under the Act 30/1963 and executed the sale deed in favour of the defendants 2 to 88 in respect of the temple's property. Further, it is false allegation and the respondent can very well defend the suit by filing proper written statement in the suit. Further, the father of the respondent has not filed any complaint and the complaint is filed by the first defendant in the suit. Therefore, the respondent has no locus to file the present complaint and it is liable to be quashed. (iii)The petitioner never filed and averred the plaint on her personal capacity and she has nothing to do with the averments made in para 11 of plaint and she has no intention to defame the father of the respondent herein. Any officer can be appointed in the capacity of Assistant Commissioner/Executive Officer of the temple and as such, the officers, on their personal capacity cannot be impleaded as accused. Before taking cognizance of the complaint, there is a statutory mandate set out under Sections 195 and 197 of Cr.P.C. There is a specific prohibition that no Court shall take cognizance except with previous sanction. Here, admittedly, there is no sanction obtained and as such, the learned Judicial Magistrate ought not to have taken cognizance against the petitioner. (iv)The petitioner's name nowhere find place in the plaint and her official capacity that too to represent on behalf of the plaintiff temple mentioned in the plaint. The entire averments made by the plaintiff and the petitioner is noway connected with the suit properties or the trusteeship of the temple. Further, she has no personal motive or enmity against the respondent or his family members to tarnish their name among the public. The entire criminal proceedings are nothing but counterblast of the said proceedings that too for declaration and recovery of suit properties from the respondent and other defendants. Even assuming that the suit averments have been averred by the petitioner, it is only on good faith to recover the temple properties from the defendants. It is never amounts defamation on anybody. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner also contended that since the petitioner is a Government servant, the learned Judicial Magistrate ought not to have taken cognizance of the impugned complaint without prior sanction from the Government. It is clear violation of statutory set out under Section 197 of Cr.P.C. Therefore, he prayed for quashment of entire criminal proceedings. 5.Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent would submit that the complainant is a practicing advocate at Karur Bar. His father was also an advocate by profession and he had also involved in social activities. The father of the complainant also had earned law of reputation in the society by sincere truthful and honesty in all walks of his life and he was holding high positions in the society. While being so, the petitioner/accused filed a suit in O.S.No.54 of 2011 on the file of the District Judge, Karur, wherein, the respondent and his family members are impleaded as defendants. In the plaint, the false allegations were made in para 11 with an intention to tarnish the image of the complainant?s father. Those lines are deliberate lies and there are neither true nor made in good faith. This statement is spread among the general public by the plaintiff and it amounts to publication of imputation within the meaning of Section 499 of I.P.C. 6.Further, he would contend that the document, which was annexed with the plaint viz., Inam Fair Register has been found to be forged one by the petitioner and another. In this regard, he also lodged a complaint and the same is registered in crime No.17 of 2012 on the file of Inspector of Police, District Crime Branch, Karur. As such, the imputation of para 11 of the plaint is per se defamatory and caused irrepairable damage and injury to the reputation of the father of the complainant. Therefore, the petitioner has committed the offences punishable under Section 499 and 500 of I.P.C. 7.He would further contend that the nature of this kind of offence, it cannot be necessary to obtain any sanction for prosecution. Even then, for obtaining sanction, the respondent sent so many representations with the concerned authorities. But, after receipt of the same, there is no response. Therefore, it has to be presumed that the sanction for prosecution as against the petitioner has been granted and hence, he prayed for the dismissal of the quash petition. 8.Heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner as well as the learned counsel appearing for the respondent and perused the materials placed before this Court. 9.The petitioner/A1 is an Assistant Commissioner and Executive Officer of H.R. and C.E. department of Arulmighu Kalyana Venkatramanaswamy Temple, Thanthonimalai, Karur District. The Idol Sri Kalyana Pasupatheeswaraswamy, Sri Kalyana Pasupatheeswarasamy Devasthanam, Karur filed a suit in O.S.No.54 of 2011 on the file of the District Judge, Karur for declaration and recovery of its property from 88 defendants, in which, the second respondent was shown as the first defendant. The petitioner, being an Executive Officer of the said temple, represented the plaintiff temple. Therefore, she has nothing to do with the plaint and its averments and the documents filed along with the suit. Moreover, the said suit was laid in the year 2011 and the alleged Inam Fair Register was obtained on 20.05.2009. Admittedly, the petitioner joined as Executive Officer of the plaintiff temple only on 28.07.2011. Therefore, she has nothing to do with the said documents and only on instructions of temple administering committee, the suit has been laid in which the petitioner represented on behalf of the temple. As far as the second accused is concerned, while he was working as Executive Officer of the plaintiff temple, who had written the Inam Fair Register. 10.As far as the present complaint for the offences punishable under Section 499 and 500 of I.P.C. is concerned, the alleged averments had been averred by the petitioner in the plaint only in a representing capacity on behalf of the temple. Even the name of the petitioner has not been mentioned in the plaint and she has no way connected with the said allegations made in para 11 of the plaint. It is relevant to extract the provision of Section 499 is extracted herein: ?499. Defamation ?Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person.? On a simple reading of Section 499 of I.P.C., it can be seen that the essential ingredients for commission of an offence of defamation would be by making publication or any imputation just by words either spoken or written or by visible representations or with knowledge or reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of any person. 11.In the case on hand, the averments made in the plaint in para 11 that the father of the first defendant appears to have played fraud during the settlement enquiry made under Act 30 of 1963. The suit has been filed for declaration and recovery of possession of the suit property belongs to the temple. The averment in para 11 has been made in good faith. Admittedly, the father of the respondent was the Managing Trustee of the suit temple and the respondent is in possession of the suit property. The petitioner as an Assistant Commissioner of H.R. and C.E. department and also holding additional full charge as Executive Officer of the plaintiff temple, filed the suit and the petitioner has no personal motive or enmity against the respondent or his family members. It is also seen that only to escape from the civil proceedings i.e. to recover the suit property, the respondent filed this complaint and also lodged a complaint before the District Crime Branch, Karur as against the petitioner. 12.Further, Section 85 of H.R. and C.E. Act confers protection of action taken by the petitioner. It is relevant to extract the provision of Section 85 of H.R. and C.E. Act, 1959, which reads as follows: ?85.Protection of action taken under this Chapter.- (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against any person for anything which is, in good faith, done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Chapter or any other made in pursuance of any of those provisions. (2)No suit or other legalproceeding shall lie against the Tribunal, Commissioner, Additional Commissioner, Joint Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner or Assistant Commissioner for any damage caused or likely to be cause anuthing, in good faith, done or intended, to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Chapter or any order made in pursuance of any of those provisions.? Therefore, filing of civil suit on behalf of the temple cannot be deprived of the said protection. Here, on good faith, the present suit has been filed for declaration and recovery of possession of the temple property from the respondent. That apart, so many officers in the cadre of Assistant Commissioner/Executive officer may come to represent the plaintiff temple. Therefore, it cannot be taken as personal vengeance against the respondent and it is not amount to defamation. Moreover, in the present suit, the plaint has been rejected by the trial Court and as against which the plaintiff temple filed appeal suit and it is pending in S.R. stage before this Court. 13.The learned counsel appearing for the respondent relied upon the judgments reported in AIR 1971 SC 1567 ? Sukra Mahto V. Basudeo Kumar, wherein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in para 7 as follows: ?7.The relevant provision in the present case is the Ninth Exception to section 499 of the Indian Penal Code. Section 499 deals with defamation. Section 500 prescribes punishment for defamation. There are nine exceptions to section 499 . These nine exceptions are the cases in which there is no defamation. The Ninth Exception covers the present case and is as follows :- "It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good". The ingredients of the Ninth Exception are first that the imputation must be made in good faith; secondly, the imputation must be for protection of the interest of the person making it or of any other person or for the public good. Good faith is a question of fact. So is protection of the interest of the person making it. Public good is also a question of fact. This Court is Harbhajan Singh v. State of Punjab (1) in dealing with the Ninth Exception to section 499 of the Indian Penal Code said that it would have to be found out whether a person acted with due care, and attention. This Court said there "Simple,belief or actual belief by itself is not enough. The appellant must show that the belief in his impugned statement had a rational basis and was not just a blind simple belief. That is where the element of due care and attention plays an important role". The person alleging good faith has to establish as a fact that he made enquiry before he made the imputation and he has to give reasons and facts to indicate that he acted with due care and attention and was satisfied that the imputation was true. The proof of the truth of the statement is not an element of the Ninth Exception as of the First Exception to section 499 . In the Ninth Exception the person making the imputation has to substantiate that his enquiry was attended with due care and attention and he was thus satisfied that the imputation was true. The accent is on the enquiry, care and objective and not subjective satisfaction.? Further, he relied on the judgment of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1971 SC 1389 ? Balraj Khanna V. Moti Ram , wherein the Apex Court has held that the question of applicability of exceptions to Section 499 of I.P.C. as well as other defences that may be available to the appellants will have to be gone into during the trial of the complaint. 14.Further, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent relied upon the judgment reported in (2010) 6 SCC 243 ? Jeffrey J. Diermeier V. State of West Bengal , wherein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in para 39 as follows: ?39.The question has to be considered on the facts and circumstances of each case, having regard to the nature of imputation made; the circumstances on which it came to be made and the status of the person who makes the imputation as also the status of the person against whom the imputation is allegedly made. These and a host of other considerations would be relevant and required to be considered for deciding the appellants' plea of ?good faith? and ?public interest?. Unfortunately, all these are questions of fact and matters for evidence.? Further, he relied on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in (2012) 3 SCC 64 ? Subramanian Swamy V. Manmohan Singh , where, it has been held as follows: ?81. In my view, the Parliament should consider the Constitutional imperative of Article 14 enshrining the rule of law wherein `due process of law' has been read into by introducing a time limit in Section 19 of the P.C. Act 1988 for its working in a reasonable manner. The Parliament may, in my opinion, consider the following guidelines: a) All proposals for sanction placed before any Sanctioning Authority, empowered to grant sanction for the prosecution of a public servant under section 19 of the P.C. Act must be decided within a period of three months of the receipt of the proposal by the concerned authority. b) Where consultation is required with the Attorney General or the Solicitor General or the Advocate General of the State, as the case may be, and the same is not possible within the three months mentioned in clause (a) above, an extension of one month period may be allowed, but the request for consultation is to be sent in writing within the three months mentioned in (a) above. A copy of the said request will be sent to the prosecuting agency or the private complainant to intimate them about the extension of the time limit. c) At the end of the extended period of time limit, if no decision is taken, sanction will be deemed to have been granted to the proposal for prosecution, and the prosecuting agency or the private complainant will proceed to file the charge sheet/complaint in the court to commence prosecution within 15 days of the expiry of the aforementioned time limit.? In respect of sanction to prosecute a Government Servant, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent relied on the judgment of this Court reported in (2016) 2 MLJ (Crl.) 527 ? Bagavathiappan Pillai V. State , wherein, this Court has held as follows: ?15.The above decisionn applies to the facts of this case and therefore, no sanction is required, as he ceases to be a Public Servant at the time when the Court took cognizance of the case. Even otherwise, as contended by the 2nd respondent/defacto complainant, there is a deemed sanction for not passing any orders in the petition given for sanction within the stipulated time frame. 16.The failure to pass or delay in passing any orders in the application for sanction submitted by the defacto complainant would amount to and result in deemed sanction.? 15.Here, the question of sanction would not arise in the case on hand, since the learned Judicial Magistrate had taken cognizance and issued process to the petitioner and pending proceedings, the petitioner filed this quash petition. As such, the above cited judgments are not relevant to the present case on hand. 16.In view of the above discussion, this Court is of the considered view that an offence of defamation has not been made out in the averment averred in para 11 of the plaint of suit in O.S.No.54 of 2011 on the file of the District Judge, Karur. Further, the essential ingredients to constitute the offence under Section 499 of I.P.C., viz., intention or knowledge to cause harm thereby to defame the father of the respondent is cautiously absent. Therefore, the complaint in S.T.C.No.792 of 2012 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.1, Karur is liable to be quashed. 17.In the result, this criminal original petition is allowed and the criminal proceedings in S.T.C.No.792 of 2012 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.1, Karur against the petitioner is quashed. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed. To The Judicial Magistrate No.1, Karur .