Additional Sessions Judge-Ii vs Sh. Akash Gupta on 15 September, 2009 1 IN THE COURT OF SH. DHARMESH SHARMA : ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE-II, NORTH DISTRICT : DELHI CRIMINAL REVISION NO: 100/06 & 101/06 (two revisions) CR 100/06 Sh. K.S. Kohli Chairman, Frankfinn Aviation Services Pvt. Ltd., 719. Suneja Towr-II District Centre, Janak Puri, New Delhi - 58 ...........REVISIONIST VERSUS 1. Sh. Akash Gupta Sole Proprietor 89, Mall Road, Kingsway Camp, Delhi -9 2. Sh. Aurvinder Singh Sabharwal President SAUVEUR B-78, Janakpuri, New Delhi. 3. Sh. Manmohan Singh Gulati General Secretary SAUVEUR B-62, Shankar Garden, Vikas Puri, New Delhi. 4. Sh. Balram Dhingra Treasurer SAUVEUR 2 B-12, Nanak Pura, Modi Nagar, Distt. Ghaziabad U.P. 201 201 5. Zariat Rehman Member SAUVEUR 31/2a, Marquis Street, Kolkatta - 700 016 Also AT 22, Dent Mission Road, Kolkatta 6. Mrs. Sheikh Shahnaz Sayed Ali Member SAUVEUR 20/A, Fanuswala Building Ground Floor, Sanklij Street, Byculla, Mumbai 400 008 7. Mrs. Katerina Imchin Employee FRANKFINN MANAGEMENT CONSULTANTS 721, Suneja Tower, District Cetre, Janak Puri, New Delhi 8. Bhupali Kadam Associate FRANKFINN MANAGEMENT CONSULTANTS 721, Suneja Tower, District Cetre, Janak Puri, New Delhi 9. Ms. Rakhi Parmar d/o Late Shri Hira Chand Parmar 3-B/5, M.H.A.D. Near Punjab & Maharashtra Bank, Andheri East, Mumbai 3 10. Sh. Yogender Singh Secretary LOK DAL 3, Pant Marg, New Delhi-1, Post Box 66 Also At 23/4, Shakti Nagar Chowk Delhi - 7 11. Sh. Harpal Singh, Sole Proprietor, Sai Enterprises, Chatwal Complex Fateh Nagar, Jail Road Hari Nagar, Delhi. Also At Eakas, Chatwal Complex Fateh Nagar, Jail Road Hari Nagar, Delhi. 12. Chief Editor Hindustan Times Respondents CR 101/06 1. Sh. Aurvinder Singh Sabharwal President SAUVEUR B-78, Janakpuri, New Delhi. 2. Sh. Balram Singh Dhingra General Secretary SAUVEUR B-62, Shankar Garden, Vikas Puri, New Delhi. 3. Zariat Rehman Member SAUVEUR 4 31/2a, Marquis Street, Kolkatta - 700 016 Also AT 22, Dent Mission Road, Kolkatta 4. Mrs. Sheikh Shahnaz Sayed Ali Member SAUVEUR 20/A, Fanuswala Building Ground Floor, Sanklij Street, Byculla, Mumbai 400 008 ........Petitioners VERSUS 1. The State NCT of Delhi 2. Sh. Akash Gupta Sole Proprietor of AIR HOSTESS ACADEMY 89, Mall Road, Kingsway Camp, Delhi - 110 009 .....Respondents APPEARANCE:- Mr. Maqsood Ahmed, Ld. APP for the State Sh. R. K. Nasim Advocate with Sh. Ajit Nayar Advocate for the revisionist Kulvinder Singh Kohli. Mr. Mukesh Kalia with Sh. Vibhore Goyela Advocate for the revisionist Arvinder Singh Sabharwal, Balram Singh Dhingra, Zariat Rehman, Mrs. Sheikh Shahnaj Sayed Ali. Sh. Hari Haran Advocate for Respondent no. 2 5 ORDER 1. This common order shall decide the above noted two criminal revisions raising common question of law and facts preferred by the petitioners / revisionists assailing an order dated 26.02.2005 passed by Ms. Preeti Aggarwal Gupta, Ld. MM, Delhi whereby the petitioners / revisionists along with others have been summoned to face trial for committing offence u/s 499 / 500 / 120B IPC . 2. In brief the case of the complainant/respondent no. 2 is that he is the sole proprietor of 'Air Hostess Academy (in brief 'AHA'), a reputed Institute and pioneer in the field of imparting training to students/ personnel in the field of Aviation and Hospitality Industry established in 1997 which is certified under ISO 9001:2000. Accused no. 1 Kulvinder Singh Kohli petitioner in CR No. 100/06 is stated to be the Chairman of rival concern M/s Frankfinn Management Consultant, a society registered on 21.02.2003 in Delhi and it is his case that the said society is bringing out a magazine 'Aviation Times' and in the June issue Ex. CW 1/C accused no. 2 to 7 have been shown as employee of accused no. 2. It is alleged by the complainant that at the instigation of accused no. 1 his employee accused no. 7 took admission in the Academy of the complainant at Mumbai where accused no. 6 and 7 were shown as local references / guardians and later acting in criminal conspiracy to tarnish the image and business reputation of the complainant's Academy, a letter was written by accused no. 8 to verify the credential of 'AHA' to accused 6 no. 1 who advised her to approach an NGO going by the name of 'Sauveur'; that on receiving letter dated 21.02.2003 from accused no. 6, accused no. 2 Aurvinder Singh Sabharwal, President 'Sauveur' shot a letter dated 28.03.2003 to Singapore and Malasiya Air Lines referring certain news items against the 'AHA' in the past and inquiring whether they had any affiliation with 'AHA'. The letters were replied by Malasiya and Singapore Airlines vide their response dated 31.03.2003 and 10.04.2006 respectively wherein the airlines indicated that they had no tie up with 'AHA'. It is alleged that the 'Sauveur' an NGO has been set up by the accused persons in pursuance of their criminal conspiracy sometimes in January - February 2003 only. It is further the case of the complainant that at the behest of accused no. 1, accused no. 8, 9 and 10 were coaxed and instigated to file criminal complaint against him and his Academy so much so that on 19th May 2003 he came to know about a false, scandalous and highly defamatory advertisement in the mid-day newspaper in Mumbai stating that an FIR against 'Air Hostess Academy' has been registered which news items / notice was issued at the behest of 'Sauveur', a self proclaimed NGO. Aggrieved, the complainant filed a suit for injunction in the High Court of Delhi and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Manmohan Sarin, vide order dated 22.05.2003 passed an interim injunction order thereby restraining the self proclaimed NGO besides several newspaper from publishing or taking out any advertisement in the form or matter and depicted in Annexures A & B in any newspaper, magazine or circulating through an electronic media. It is the case of the complainant 7 that despite of such injunction order, defamatory article came out in the Hindustan Times in its Edition May 21, 2003 at the behest of the so called NGO 'Sauveur'. This complaint was instituted on 19.05.2004 and complainant examined himself as CW-1 on 17.01.2005 and the Ld. M.M, Delhi vide impugned order dated 26.10.2005 found a prima facie case to proceed against accused no. 1 to 7 and summoned them to face trial for an offence u/s 499 / 500 / 120B IPC. 3. In the Criminal Revision No. 100/06 accused no. 1, petitioner / revisionist Kulvinder Singh Kohli stated that he is a practicing advocate and a non-Executive Chairman of M/s Frankfinn Aviation Services Pvt. Ltd. and that he is not the Incharge nor responsible for the affairs of the said company. The impugned summoning order is challenged on the grounds that the ingredients of the offence u/s 499 / 500 / 120B IPC are not satisfied and the order is passed in a mechanical manner without application of mind; that the impugned summoning order is erroneous in law and there is no case to proceed against him. In Criminal Revision No. 101/06, petitioner has also assailed the impugned summoning order on similar grounds besides setting out the objects and purpose of setting of the NGO which as per them is working in the field of consumers' interest and educating public about their legal rights, and it is stated that the news item in question was carried out after detailed inquiry and to serve benefit to public at large thereby help young and gullible persons from being cheated by mushrooming Institute under the garb of giving a guarantee for their jobs in International Airlines. 8 4. Ld. Counsel for the parties were given several opportunities to address arguments but for one reason or the other they could not come together so as to assist this Court and address arguments and throw light on matters on issue and, therefore, they were directed to file written submissions which have since been filed. 5. I have perused the written submissions filed on behalf of the parties and the case law relied upon. I have also perused the relevant record of the case. 6. First thing first, bare perusal of the public notice Ex.CW1/H in the issue of Hindustan Times, Delhi Edition on 21.03.2003 would show that it has been issued at the behest of the 'Sauveur' an NGO claiming itself to be a consumer rights protection NGO and issuing such article allegedly in public interest cautioning the public to be aware of the acts of cheating which have been committed by the 'Air Hostess Academy, Mumbai having its office at Delhi wherein claims and commitments made by 'AHA' had been put under a cloud inter alia indicating about cheating case filed against the academy at various Courts at Mumbai; and that the 'AHA' having no affiliation or tie up with Singapore or Malasiya Airlines; and 'AHA' not providing practical knowledge to its students to acquaint them in flight training procedure and also disputing the claim of the 'AHA' regarding placement of the students in different Airlines as Air Hostesses and flight Stewards. 9 7. Bare perusal of the public notice EX. CW 1/H would show that it is defamatory in its contents and also in its design. The second issue that arise as to who are the persons that are connected with the issuance of said defamatory article. At this stage of the case, prima facie it appears that petitioner/revisionist Aurvinder Singh Sabharwal, is the President of the NGO 'Sauveur'. It also prima facie appears that the magazine "Aviation Times" is brought out by the Frankfinn Management and in its June issue, which is Ex. CW1/C Mr. Aurvinder Singh Sabharwal shown to be the overseas correspondent. It also prima facie appears that this magazine is published from premises no. D-78, Janakpurai, New Delhi which as per the complainant is the residence of accused no. 2 Aurvinder Singh Sabharwal. On perusal of the introduction page of the magazine 'Aviation Times' Ex. CW 1/C it also appears that accused no. 7 Katerina Imchin happens to be its Correspondent based at Chenai and as per photocopy of the registration certified marked 'B' of 'Sauveur' accused no. 3 Manmohan Singh Gulati happens to the General Secretary, accused no. 4 Balram Dhingra happens to be the Treasurer and prima facie accused no. 5 and 6 are shown to be Member of the magazine 'Sauveur'. 8. Ld. Counsel for the petitioner/revisionist Kulvinder Singh Kohli has relied on decision in M/s Pepsi Food Ltd. Vs. Special Judicial Magistrate ; 1998 SC 128. It was a case where the powers of the High Court u/s 482 Cr.P.C. vis- a-vis Article 226 of the Constitution of India were discussed 10 where in para 28 it was observed that ' Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a serious matter and criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of course". It was observed that "the order of Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto". Reliance is also placed on an earlier decision by the Apex Court titled Nagawwa v. Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi and others ; AIR 1976 SC 1947. In the cited case in para 5, the scope of the revision while enquiring into a summoning order passed, consequent to enquiry u/s 202 and 204 of the Cr.P.C. was discussed and it was observed that the summoning order is liable to be quashed or set aside in the following circumstances : (1) Where the allegations made in the complaint of the statement of the witnesses recorded in support of the same taken at their face value make out absolutely no case against the accused or the complaint does not disclose the essential ingredients of an offence which is alleged against the accused; (2) Where the allegations made in the complaint are patently absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent person can ever reach a conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused ; (3) where the discretion exercised by the Magistrate in issuing process is capricious and arbitrary having been based either on no evidence or on materials which are wholly irrelevant or inadmissible ; and (4) where the complaint suffers 11 from fundamental legal defects, such as, want of sanction, or absence of a complaint by legally competent authority and the like." 9. I am afraid on a careful reading of the cited cases, I do not see how the ratio supports the contentions of the petitioners/revisionists, and on the contrary at this stage, the ratio of the cited cases persuade this court to sustain the impugned summoning order. At the cost of reputation, there appears to be a nexus between the accused number 1 who is Chairman of M/s Frankfinn Management & Consultant Pvt. Ltd. Prima Facie it appears that he is the Chairman of said firm as in the magazine 'Aviation Times' and it is this person who is writing the "Chairman's Column" in such capacity and not as a Guest. He happens to be in rival business as that of the complainant. The complainant prima facie in his evidence suggests that there has been a conspiracy between the accused persons to tarnish or damage his business reputation and credibility in the market. The impugned public notice is per se defamatory which puts the entire business activities of the complainant's Academy in a precarious condition. 10. So far as written submissions on behalf of accused no. 2 Aurvinder Singh Sabharwal are concerned, I find force in the submissions of Mr. Hari Haran, Ld. Adv. for respondent no. 2/complainant that whether or not the impugned public notice has been issued is "an imputation of truth which public interest would require to be made and published" within the meaning of exception Fifth to Section 409 ; and whether or 12 not the imputation is made in good faith as per exception Ninth of Section 499 of the IPC, are consideration which cannot certainly be weighed at the stage of summoning. 11. In the said view of the discussion, I find no illegality or impropriety in the impugned order by the Ld. M.M. and, therefore, there is no merit in both the revision petitions. The revision petition no. 100/06 and 101/06 are hereby dismissed. Original order be placed in revision petition no. 100/06 and a copy thereof in Revision No. 101/06. Nothing discussed herein shall tantamount to an expression of opinion on the merits of the case. Trial Court record along with copy of this order be sent back. Revision files bearing nos. 100/06 and 101/06 be consigned to Record Room. ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT (DHARMESH SHARMA) TODAY: ON 15.09.2009. ASJ-II, NORTH DISTRICT, DELHI. 13 CR Nos. 100/06 & 101/06 15.9.2009 Present: Counsel for the petitioners/revisionist. Counsel for the respondent. Vide separate detailed common order, Criminal Revision nos. 100/06 and 101/06 are hereby dismissed. Original order be placed in revision petition no. 100/06 and a copy thereof in Revision No. 101/06. Trial Court record along with copy of this order be sent back. Revision files bearing nos. 100/06 and 101/06 be consigned to Record Room. (DHARMESH SHARMA) ASJ-II, NORTH DISTRICT, DELHI.