M/S Jindal Steel & Power Ltd vs ) The State on 13 November, 2014 IN THE COURT OF SHRI LOKESH KUMAR SHARMA ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE­04, NEW DELHI DISTRICT PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI Unique I D No. : 02403R0184312013 Criminal Revision Number : 57/2/14 dated 07.02.2014 CC No. : 20/1/13 PS : Chanakyapuri U/s : 499/500 IPC M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd. Through its Director Sh. Rajeev Bhaduria Jindal Centre, 12 Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi­110066 ....Revisionist/Petitioner versus 1) The State Through Additional Public Prosecutor 2) Planman Media Pvt. Ltd. (Owner of the Sunday Indian) IIPM Tower, C­56/30, Sector­62, Noida­201301 UP 3) Mr. Arindam Chaudhuri Editor in Chief The Sunday Indian CR No. 57/2/14 1/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors. IIPM Tower C­56/30, Sector­62, Noida­201301 UP 4) Mr. A. Sandeep Editor The Sunday Indian IIPM Tower C­56/30, Sector­62, Noida­201301 UP 5) Mr. Ashok Bose Publisher The Sunday Indian IIPM Tower C­56/30, Sector­62, Noida­201301 UP ..... Respondents Revision received by Court: 07.02.2014 Arguments concluded : 28.10.2014 Date of order : 13.11.2014 :ORDER: 1 By way of the present revision petition, the petitioner has challenged the CR No. 57/2/14 2/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . impugned order dated 04.10.2013 passed by the court of Ms. Gomati Manocha, Ld. MM­02, New Delhi in CC No. 20/1/13 titled as Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs Planman India Pvt. Ltd & Ors., whereby the Ld. MM was pleased to decline issuance of summons against the respondents herein for commission of an offence under section 499 , 500 IPC related to criminal defamation of petitioner as alleged in the complaint filed before the Ld. Trial Court and was further pleased to dismiss the said complaint as filed by the complainant before the trial court. 2 Briefly stated the facts that had given rise to the filing of the present revision petition are succinctly given as under: As per the complainant/petitioner herein, petitioner is a listed public company incorporated under the Companies Act 1956 having its registered office at OP Jindal Marg, Hissar and corporate office at Jindal Centre, 12 Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi­110066 and Sh. Rajiv Bhaduria, one of its directors had been authorized to file present petition on its behalf vide Board Resolution dated 10.01.2013. On 04.01.2012 the respondent nos. 3 to 5 had edited, printed, published and circulated a special story carrying the title "shooting the messenger literally" and "After khap and coalgate, Now Naveen Jindal Spars with Zee" (offending article) in the magazine tiled "The Sunday Indian". As alleged the offending article was published without due care, caution, just or CR No. 57/2/14 3/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . reasonable cause and without even verifying the basic facts either from the petitioner or concerned authorities and amounted to a deliberate attempt on the part of all the respondents to create a wrong impression in the minds of general public concerning the petitioner as if the petitioner was involved in the alleged "coalgate scam" with the sole intention to defame and lower down the position of the petitioner publically by sensationalization and distortion of facts. The offending article was not only per­se defamatory and motivated but also contained false, baseless and misleading statements / allegations against the petitioner. The respondent nos. 2 to 5 were served with a legal notice dated 15.11.2012, on behalf of the petitioner, bringing to their notice that the contents of the offending articles published by them on 04.11.2012 were false and defamatory and they were also requested to immediately withdraw the contents of the offending article and also to tender an express, unqualified and unambiguous apology to the petitioner but despite that they had not done so and had further gone ahead with publishing another defamatory article titled "The Hounding of Zee" against the petitioner in the magazine "The Sunday Indian" on 23.12.2012, thereby falsely conveying that the petitioner and its officials were dishonest and had unjustly enriched themselves at the cost of public monies. The contents of those articles were stated to be not only knowingly in­accurate, misleading, hurtful, biased, regressive, malicious, CR No. 57/2/14 4/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . slanderous and per­se defamatory in nature qua petitioner and its management but were also published without seeking any verification either from the petitioner or from the concerned public authorities. Hence, the petitioner was constrained to file before the trial court a complaint for the commission of offences u/s 499, 500, 501, 502 IPC r/w section 34 / 120B IPC, explaining specific role played by each of the aforesaid respondents in commission of said offences. 3 The Ld. Trial court vide its order dated 01.02.2013 after taking cognizance of the offences was pleased to direct the complainant to lead its pre­summoning evidence. Thereafter, the petitioner had examined three witnesses namely CW­1 Sh. Rohit Kumar, CW­2 Sh. Rajiv Bhaduria and CW­3 Sh. Sanjay Kumar in its pre summoning evidence. After hearing arguments, the Ld. Trial court had dismissed the complaint filed by the complainant/petitioner vide impugned order dated 04.10.2013. 4 The petitioner had challenged the aforesaid impugned order on the following amongst other grounds: a) That the impugned order suffered from illegality, impropriety and material irregularity in as much as it was contrary to the provisions of Cr.P.C ., IPC and the facts on record and the Ld. Trial Court instead of focusing on the defamatory nature of the offending articles was not even competent to arrive at the said finding related to the passing references of CAG report qua the CR No. 57/2/14 5/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . petitioner and those findings of the Ld. Trial Court were attributed to the petitioner as an admission on its part and thus the same being contrary to the record, would have directly prejudiced the investigation being carried out in the allocation of coal blocks and also the investigation into the illegal acts of the reporters of the "Zee Group".It has also been stated that even the reliance on the said CAG report as placed by the petitioner was only in furtherance of its bona fide conduct to disclose all facts to the Ld. Trial Court and not as an admission of its contents and the petitioner had, at no point of time, either in the pleadings or in the testimony of CWs or during the course of arguments, had ever admitted to any wrong doing or illegality either being committed by it or by the government/concerned ministries/agencies and hence the findings of the Ld. Trial Court on this aspect were not only misleading but were also beyond its jurisdiction. b) It has also been stated that the aforesaid two offending articles were published by the respondents herein with the knowledge and belief that the same would have certainly caused harm to the reputation, image and goodwill of the petitioner and the Ld. Trial Court had ignored the same and had erroneously proceeded on the premises that intention was the sine qua non for the offence of defamation, and the impugned order had been passed by the Ld. MM without appreciating the relevant and material testimonies of CW1 and CW3 and on this very ground the present revision petition deserved to be CR No. 57/2/14 6/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . allowed. c) It has been stated further that the Ld. Trial Court had also failed to appreciate the fact that the media did not have the right or license to defame any person. The law of defamation treated all citizens equally in this regard. Publishing houses were in no different position than that from an individual. Media was also subject to the same rules as were applicable to others and no special rights or privileges were granted to them under the law. Journalists rather had a greater responsibility to guard against false statements for the simple reason that their utterances had a far larger reach and impact than the utterance of an individual and they were more likely to be believed by ignorant people. d) The Ld. Trial Court had also failed to appreciate the ratio of judgments (1) passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta in the case of Santosh Kumar Chatterjee v. Radhika Ranjan Ghose & Anr, reported in 66 CWN 24; ( 2) K.M. Mathew v. K.A. Abraham & Ors , 2002(6) SCC 670; ( 3) K. Gopalakrishnan & Ors v. A.C. Thomas & Anr , 2008( 1) KLJ 385 and P.A. Abdul Hakkim & Anr. v. Ramesan & Anr 207 (1) KLJ 726, while passing the impugned order, as the false and incorrect statements published by the respondents no. 2 to 5 about the Chairman of the petitioner company were, malicious and malafide, which were published in the form of two offending articles with an intention to malice the position of Chairman of the petitioner CR No. 57/2/14 7/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . company which would have caused a direct loss to the reputation of petitioner as well and hence those acts of respondents no. 2 to 5 had squarely fallen within the four corners of the offence of defamation. 5 I have heard Sh. Amit Sibbal, Ld. Sr. Counsel alongwith Sh Madhav Khurana, Ld. Counsel for the petitioner, Sh Ravinder Bhati, Ld. Addl. PP for the respondent/state and also Sh. Amit Sharma, Ld. Counsel for the remaining respondents and have considered the rival contentions of the respective parties. 6 In order to appreciate the respective contentions raised before this court by the respective parties,it shall be worthwhile to examine the provisions of sections 449 and 500 IPC, which are reproduced here as under: S. 499 . Defamation.­­­Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. Explanation 1.­­It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.­­It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. CR No. 57/2/14 8/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . Explanation 3.­­An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.­­No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. S.500 . Punishment for defamation.­­­Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 7 In the light of the facts and circumstances of the present case, Sh. Amit Sharma, Ld. Counsel appearing for respondents no. 2 to 5 has submitted that prima facie it is Naveen Jindal who is trying to initiate the litigations under the garb of the petitioner which is a separate juristic identity and had its own individual legal rights as well as obligations and since nothing defamatory in particular has been averred against the petitioner in those articles, hence, the petitioner itself has no locus standi to plead and peruse the case on behalf of Naveen Jindal. Besides this, Ld. Counsel appearing for the respondents no. 2 to 5 has also taken the plea of defence of fair reporting available to the CR No. 57/2/14 9/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . respondents while publishing any article in public interest at large and has also relied upon factors and parameters for consideration to be borne in mind by the court while issuing orders of summoning of the respondents no. 2 to 5 as accused in this case as personal liberty of an individual is always at stake in criminal proceedings. 8 Reliance has also been placed on the citation reported as " President and Directors of Agricultural Produce Cooperative Marking Society Ltd. v. M K Mohamed Ali & Ors ", MANU/KA/0201/1967: 1969 Crl. L. J 701, wherein the Hon'ble High Court of Mysore had held as under: "Evidently it appears that the Magistrate had gone into the merits of the case which he should not have done. For the purpose of ascertaining whether the complaint petition was maintainable or not, or whether the court had jurisdiction to entertain the same, the complaint petition itself ought to have been looked into. The Magistrate was not right in adverting himself to the merits of the case." (Para 11) 9 Reliance has also been placed on the ratio of judgment cited as " Homen Borgohain and ors v. The Brahamaputra Valley Regional Handloom Weaver 's Cooperative Society Ltd", MANU/GH/0074/1994 : 1995 Cr. L.J. 2357 wherein the Hon'ble High Court of Gauhati had held as under: CR No. 57/2/14 10/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . "Case of petitioner was that accused made some statements defaming only President and Directors of Society and not of Society itself--Since a compliant by an aggrieved person was a condition precedent to jurisdiction of a Court to deal with offences mentioned in section 198 CrPC (old) a complaint by Society which was not aggrieved person held to be a nullity--Further, complaint was not maintainable since an offence under section 500 IPC could not be gone into in absence of person aggrieved--Hence, complainant Society not being person aggrieved had no locus standi to file complaint for defamation and accordingly proceeding in complaint which was pending was liable to be quashed." 10 Ld. Counsel appearing for the respondents has also relied upon the ratio of judgment in case "Jawaharlal Darda and others v. Manohar Rao Ganpat Rao Kapsikar" (1998) 4 SCC 112, wherein it had been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court as under: "..True report--If defamatory--Publication of news item disclosing accurate and true report of proceedings of Legislative Assembly--Statement of Minister disclosing misappropriation of govt. fund--Name of complainant mentioned as one of the persons involved in such misappropriation--Circumstances disclosing that the news item was published about public conduct of public servants for public good in good faith believing the statement to be true." (Head Notes) CR No. 57/2/14 11/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . 11 Reliance has also been placed on the judgment in the case of " Vadilal Panchal v. Dattatraya Dulaji Gha Digaonkar and Anr. ", 1960 Crl. L. J, 1499, wherein it had been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court as under: " The general scheme of the aforesaid sections is quite clear. Section 200 says inter alia what a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint shall do on receipt of such a complaint. Section 202 says that the Magistrate may, if he thinks fit, for reasons to be recorded in writing, postpone the issue of process for compelling the attendance of the person complained against and direct an inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the complaint; in other words, the scope of an inquiry under the section is limited to finding out the truth or falsehood of the complaint in order to determine the question of the issue of process. The inquiry is for the purpose of ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the complaint; that is, for ascertaining whether there is evidence in support of the complaint so as to justify the issue of process and commencement of proceedings against the person concerned. The section does not say that a regular trial for adjudging the guilt or otherwise of the person complained against should take place at that stage; for the person complained against can be legally called upon to answer the accusation made against him only when a process has issued and he is put on trial. Section 203 , be it noted, consists of two parts; the first part indicates what are the materials which the Magistrate must consider and the second part says that if after considering those materials there is in his judgment CR No. 57/2/14 12/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . no sufficient ground for proceedings, he may dismiss the complaint. Section 204 says that if in the opinion of Magistrate there is sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall take steps for the issue of necessary process." (Para 9) Now, in the case before us it is not contended that the learned Presidency magistrate failed to consider the materials which he had to consider, before passing his order under section 203 CrPC. As a matter of fact the learned magistrate fully, fairly and impartially considered these materials. What is contended on behalf of the respondent­complainant is that as a matter of law it was not open to the learned magistrate to accept the plea of right of self­defence at a stage when all that he had to determine was whether a process should issue or not against the appellant. We are unable to accept this contention as correct. It is manifestly clear from the provision of section 203 that the judgment which the magistrate has to form must be based on the statements of the complainant and his witnesses and the result of the investigation or inquiry. The Section itself makes that clear, and it is not necessary to refer to authorities in support thereof. But the judgment which the Magistrate has to form is whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding. This does not mean that the Magistrate is bound to accept the result of the inquiry or investigation or that he must accept any plea that is set up on behalf of the person complained against. The Magistrate must apply his judicial mind to the materials on which he has to form his judgment. In arriving at his judgment he is not CR No. 57/2/14 13/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . fettered in any way except by judicial considerations; he is not bound to accept what the Inquiring Officer says, nor is he precluded from accepting a plea based on an exception, provided always there are satisfactory and reliable materials on which he can base his judgment as to whether there is sufficient ground for proceeding on the complaint or not. If the Magistrate has not misdirected himself as to the scope of an enquiry under section 202 and has applied his mind judicially to the materials before him, we think that it would be erroneous in law to hold that a plea based on an exception can never be accepted by him in arriving at his judgment. What bearing such a plea has on the case of the complainant and his witnesses, to what extent they are falsified by the evidence of other witnesses­­all these are questions which must be answered with reference to the facts of each case. No universal rule can be laid in respect of such questions. (Para 10) 12 However, this judgment as cited and relied upon by Ld. Counsel for the respondents no. 2 to 5 is of no use and avail to them and is distinguishable on the basis of the facts of the present case where provisions of section 203 CrPC were never even resorted to by the Ld. Trial Court. 13 Ld. Counsel appearing for the respondents has also placed reliance on the judgment in the matter of "Pepsi Foods ltd. And another v. Special Judicial Magistrate and others ", (1998) 5 SCC 749, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had CR No. 57/2/14 14/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . held as under: " Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of course. It is not that the complainant has to bring only two witnesses to support his allegations in the complaint to have the criminal law set into motion. The order of the Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. He has to examine the nature of allegations made in the complaint and the evidence both oral and documentary in support thereof and would that be sufficient for the complainant to succeed in bringing charge home to the accused. It is not that the Magistrate is a silent spectator at the time of recording of preliminary evidence before summoning of the accused. The Magistrate has to carefully scrutinise the evidence brought on record and may even himself put questions to the complaint and his witnesses to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the allegations or otherwise and then examine if any offence is prima facie committed by all or any of the accused." (para 28) 14 Reliance has also been placed on the judgment in the case of " Hydru v. State of Kerala " (2004)13 SCC 374 wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court had held as under: "...It is well settled that in revision against acquittal by a private party, the powers of the Revisional Court are very limited. It can interfere only if there is any CR No. 57/2/14 15/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . procedural irregularity or material evidence has been overlooked or misread by the subordinate court. If upon reappraisal of evidence, two views are possible, it is not permissible even for the appellate court in appeal against acquittal to interfere with the same, much less in revision where the powers are much narrower. ... " (Para 3) 15 Besides this, reliance has also been placed by Ld. Counsel for the respondents no. 2 to 5 on some of the extracts of CAG report. However, findings of the CAG report are irrelevant to the facts of the present case as they are per­se not­admissible in evidence and are required to be proved in ordinary manner as provided under Indian Evidence Act . 16 Per contra, Sh. Amit Sibbal, Ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for the petitioner has vehemently argued and emphasized the fact that provisions of section 499 and 500 IPC related to the offence of defamation do not talk about actual victim who had been actually defamed by any liable or slander. Rather it talks about "person aggrieved" and this term itself is a matter of trial as the person who had been actually aggrieved by the publication of an article cannot be identified unless suitable evidence to that effect had been adduced on record and hence it was submitted by Ld. Sr. Counsel for the petitioner that the trial court was not justified in denying this right to the petitioner to prove on record CR No. 57/2/14 16/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . by adducing suitable evidence that it was actually falling within the definition of term " person aggrieved" and not otherwise and thus, the Ld. MM had further erred in making the observations purely based on surmises and conjectures motivated by her personal observations. 17 So far as the locus standi of the petitioner to file such a complaint is concerned, Ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon the ratio of the case in "Santosh Kumar Chatterjee v. Radhika Ranjan Ghose & Anr", reported in 66 CWN 24, wherein it has been held as under:­ "The contention that out of the various modes described in Explanation 4 of section 499 IPC in which imputation to harm a person's reputation may be made, only an imputation lowering the credit of the person is the mode in which there can be any defamation of an association, is not correct. An association may also be defamed by an imputation which lowers the moral character of the members of the association collectively. In the instant case, that is what was done by the publication relating to the Students' Welfare Association and therefore it amounted to defamation of the members of the association as an association and as such the accused petitioner is guilty of the offence under section 500 of the Indian Penal Code." 18 Similarly, reliance has also been placed on citation of case " John Thomas v. Dr. K. Jagdeesan " (2001) 6 SCC 30, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold as under: CR No. 57/2/14 17/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . " Criminal Procedure Code , 1973-- S. 199- - Defamation­­Locus standi to file complaint­­"Some person aggrieved by the offence"­­Even if the libelous imputations are not made directly against a person but he has reasons to feel hurt on account of the same, he has locus standi to file a complaint--Where defamatory publications are made against a private limited company, its Director can file the complaint--Penal Code,1960, S.499 Expln. 2. Held: The collection of the words "by some persons aggrieved in Section 199 definitely indicates that the complaint need not necessarily be the defamed person himself. Whether the complainant has reasons to feel hurt on account of the publication is a matter to be determined by the court depending upon the facts of each case. If a company is described as engaging itself in nefarious activities, its impact would certainly fall on every Director of the company and hence he can legitimately feel the pinch of it. Similarly, if a firm is described in a publication as carrying on offensive trade, every working partner of the firm can reasonably be expected to feel aggrieved by it. As the hospital against which imputations were published in the present case is a private limited company, it is too far­fetched to rule out any one of its Directors, feeling aggrieved on account of pejoratives hurled at the company." ( Head Note:B) "The collection of the words "by some persons aggrieved" definitely indicates that the complainant CR No. 57/2/14 18/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . need not necessarily be the defamed person himself. Whether the complainant has reasons to feel hurt on account of the publication is a matter to be determined by the court depending upon the facts of each case. If a company is described as engaging itself in nefarious activities its impact would certainly fall on every Director of the company and hence he can legitimately feel the pinch of it. Similarly, if a firm is described in a publication as carrying on offensive trade, every working partner of the firm can reasonably be expected to feel aggrieved by it. If K.J. Hospital is a private limited company, it is too far­fetched to rule out any one of its Directors, feeling aggrieved on account of pejoratives hurled at the Company. Hence, the appellant cannot justifiably contend that the Director of K.J. Hospital would not fall within the wide purview of "some person aggrieved" as envisaged in Section 199(1) of the Code." ( Para 13 ) 19 So far as the plea of defence of fair reporting as taken by Ld. Counsel appearing for the respondents no. 2 to 5 is concerned, Ld. Counsel for the respondent has also relied upon the ratio of the case " Sewakram Sobhani v. R K Karanjia " (1981)3SCC 208, very famous case, also commonly known as "Blitz case", which has also been relied upon by the Ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for the petitioner, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court was pleased to issue guidelines to the print media regarding reporting of matters and cautions to be observed by them while reporting such cases and emphasis in this regard CR No. 57/2/14 19/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . has been placed by the Ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for petitioner on paras 11 and 12 of the judgment, which are reproduced below: "The High Court appears to be labouring under an impression that journalists enjoyed some kind of special privilege, and have greater freedom than others to make any imputations or allegations, sufficient to ruin the reputation of a citizen. We hasten to add that journalists are in no better position than any other person. Even the truth of an allegation does not permit a justification under the First Exception unless it is proved to be in the public good. The question whether or not it was for public good is a question of fact like any other relevant fact in issue. If they make assertions of facts as opposed to comments on them, they must either justify these assertions or, in the limited cases specified in the Ninth Exception, show that the attack on the character of another was the public good, or that it was made in good faith." (Para 11) "The freedom of the journalist is an ordinary part of the freedom of the subject, and to whatever lengths the subject in general may go, so also may the journalist, but, apart from statute law, his privilege is no other and no higher. The responsibilities which attach to this power in the dis­mentation of printed matter may, and in the case of a conscientious journalist do, make him more careful; but the range of his assertions, his criticisms, or his comments, is as wide as, and no wider than, that of any other subject. No privilege attaches to his petition." CR No. 57/2/14 20/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . (Para 12 quoting the observations made by Lord Shaw in Arnold v. King Emperor (1913­14) 41 IA 149, 169.) 20 So far as the reasonings given by the Ld. MM in the impugned order related to the rights of journalists and probable defence arising in their favour as considered by the Ld MM is concerned, the Ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for the petitioner has placed reliance on the citation of case titled " Balraj Khanna & ors v. Moti Ram " 1971(3) SCC 399, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court had categorically held that the questions related to the probable defences as provided in exceptions to section 499 IPC cannot be considered by the Magistrate at the initial stage of summoning and it is for the accused to take such defence during the trial and also to prove it in accordance with law. 21 The same was the view of the Hon'ble Apex Court in " Shatrughna Prasad Sinha v. Rajbhau Surajmal Rathi & ors." (1996) 6 SCC 263. 22 Now, if in the light of the aforesaid submissions and arguments of the respective parties, the impugned order is examined to ascertain its correctness, legality and propriety, then I have no hesitation in holding that the very perusal of the impugned order makes it amply clear that it is a fit case where this court must exercise its revisional jurisdiction to set aside the same as it suffers from various patent illegalities and irregularities committed by the Ld. MM while passing the same, as a bare perusal of the articles in question against which the present complaint was filed by the petitioner before CR No. 57/2/14 21/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . the Ld. MM, makes it amply clear that the author of the same had cited and quoted the petitioner to be a company solely owned by Naveen Jindal by regarding the petitioner as a company owned by industrialist turned MP in the opening para of the said article. 23 In the second para of the said article at the bottom line at page 40 it was observed by the author that his (referred to Naveen Jindal) company had been accused of getting coal filed allocated in February 2009 with reserves of 1500 million metric tonnes in contraventions of rules and regulations. Similarly, in the last concluding line of para 3 of the said article it had been mentioned by the author that it was the petitioner company from whom the editors of Zee News had demanded money in exchange for favor of not airing news on JSPL's Coalgate involvement and in the following para the author had gone to the extent of making a remarks/observations in the following words: "What is interesting however is how the counter sting has been successful in replacing news stories about Jindal's involvement in Coalgate with stories of alleged blackmailing by media outlets of companies. A diversionary coup by JSPL no doubt. ... JSPL has achieved its purpose by this counter sting. Nobody is talking about the Coalgate scam worth thousands of crores now and all attention is on the Rs. 50 crore allegedly demanded by a TV news outfit." 24 Further in the next following para, the author had written that even CR No. 57/2/14 22/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . Naveen Jindal had continued to deny his involvement in the Coalgate block allotted to his company which had come under the scanner in September this year (referring to year 2012) and in 2010, the Jindal companies were also issued show cause notices for not carrying out any mining activities in the awarded coal block. 25 The aforesaid observations have now been quoted in this order only as a passing reference. 26 Perusal of the entire article running into two pages goes to clearly show that the author had frequently used the terms "Naveen Jindal" as well "JSPL" as substitutes for each other rather than using them under correct legal parlance and even in the photo of Naveen Jindal as was appearing at page 41 of the said article, he had been shown as Chairman of the company with a caption that another coal mine block allotted to his company came under the scanner in September this year and in the last concluding sentence of the said article, the author had raised the question which remained to be answered, "whether scam money can really buy you true legitimacy?". 27 From the perusal of the aforesaid entire article, it becomes an apparent truth on record that while quoting the references as well as responses received not only from the editors of Zee News, i.e. Sudhir Chaudhary and Samir Ahluwalia, the author of the said article had also gone far ahead to take the version of one Ramesh Aggarwal, an alleged RTI activist who had leveled CR No. 57/2/14 23/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . allegations against the petitioner's company entering into a conspiracy to get rid of him. Not only this, but also, it is apparent that on the following page of this article of said magazine, it had also published the interviews of Sudhir Chaudhary and Samir Ahluwalia in which again the aforesaid two persons had not only given clarifications on their stand but also casted serious allegations on the petitioner way of conducting the business as well as its reputation. 28 It is interesting to note here itself that neither the author had claimed to have ever contacted the petitioner company for seeking any clarification on the allegations leveled against it by various persons including the Zee News editors as well as the said RTI activities nor it was claimed in the article that though sufficient attempts were made by the author of the same to seek clarification from the petitioner company, but it was the petitioner who had declined to respond to his request as well as all the allegations so leveled against it were leveled single handedly without even caring or bothering to seek its stand on the same. 29 Even the CAG in its report had not raised any issue of any irregularities committed by the petitioner's company in acquiring the said coal mines and complete process and procedure of allocation and allotment of coal mines is still under investigation under the supervision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and no conclusive finding till date has been reported in relation to any of the alleged scams as had been cited in the said article. In the absence of any such CR No. 57/2/14 24/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . judicial verdict having come on record in respect of any of the players in the said Coalgate scam, the article in question, as cited, had convicted not only the petitioner but also its Chairman in a trial that had been conducted and concluded by it alone and without even their being put to trial in any case whatsoever before a competent court having jurisdiction over the matter in controversy. Thus, the petitioner had been made a victim of Media­trial. 30 So far as the testimonies of CWs examined by the petitioner before the Ld. MM and their impact is concerned, though Ld. MM had mentioned about the same in brief, but nowhere in her impugned order, she had cited any reasons either for believing or for disbelieving the evidence so adduced before her by the petitioner. Rather the Ld. MM at page 8 of the impugned order was pleased to observe as under: "... It cannot be stretched to include within its ambit the image or reputation of the Chairman of the company with respect to his personal acts/conduct or comments made by him unconnected to the discharge of his functions as the Chairman of the company. Thus, any statements published in the articles regarding the personal comments/opinion/conduct of Mr. Naveen Jindal regarding controversial Khap or Caste Panchayat or regarding RTI Activist Mr. Ramesh Aggarwal are and should be considered as beyond the purview of the present complaint." 31 Hence the aforesaid observations made it clear that the Ld. MM was not CR No. 57/2/14 25/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . considering the personal life or acts, omissions or remarks of the person conducting the day­to­day business affairs of the company, i.e. Managing Director or Chairman of the company. However, all his acts as well as omissions, statements etc which were connected with discharge of his day­to­ day functions as Chairman of the petitioner company were bound to be taken into consideration by the Ld. MM while applying her mind on the point of summoning of respondents herein which she had miserably failed to do so and as she had also failed to appreciate the fact that the author was frequently mentioning and substituting the petitioner company by Naveen Jindal and vice versa. Hence it seems that while making such observations, the Ld. MM seems to have totally forgotten the law on this aspect related to functions and responsibilities of the Chairman and Managing Director of a Limited Company. 32 Further, I have no hesitation in holding that after reading the complete article in question, a common person would have considered the acts of Naveen Jindal, as acts of the petitioner and vice­versa, because of the petitioner company being owned by him as its owner and not merely being the Chairman or Managing Directors thereof. The articles is required to be examined from the point of view of a common, prudent and ordinary man and not from the point of view of a legal luminary knowing the distinction between a company and its MD. CR No. 57/2/14 26/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . 33 Further, the Ld. MM was grossly erroneous in holding that intention to cause harm is the most essential "sine qua non"of the offence of defamation and while making the said observation, the Ld. MM seems to have forgotten that in the definition of offence of "defamation" as provided under section 499 IPC, it is not only the intention alone but also knowledge or reasons for the author to believe that harm can be caused to the reputation which would constitute such offence are also the factors for consideration to be kept in mind while determining the issue related to commission of an offence of such nature or otherwise. Hence, Ld. MM had committed grave error in relying upon the ingredient of "intention" alone for the purpose of constituting an offence of defamation as defined under section 499 IPC. 34 Ld. MM had further grossly erred in holding in the following para of the impugned order that the articles had only conveyed general observations regarding a current topic of general/national interest and there was nothing contained in the said articles which was especially meant to damage the reputation of the complainant, whereas the perusal of the said article itself made it absolutely clear that specific allegations were made against the petitioner as well as its alleged owner Naveen Jindal in the said article and even otherwise also, there was no need for any special manner or specific meaning to be given to the contents of the said article as even the general imputations aimed to tarnish a person's reputation are sufficient enough to CR No. 57/2/14 27/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . prima facie constitute an offence of "defamation" as defined in the said section of IPC and in the last para of page 9 of the impugned order, the Ld. MM had further exceeded her jurisdiction when she had even gone to the extent of commenting upon and to make remarks and observations regarding government's policy for allocation and allotment of coal blocks and she had otherwise no business to make such observations, remarks and comments related to the Legislative policies which were not even the subject matter of the controversy in issue before her and hence all those observations made were clearly beyond her jurisdiction. 35 Further, from the perusal of the impugned order, it is reflected that at page 10 thereof, the Ld. MM had got herself carried away by her own surmises and conjectures and had also taken into consideration the probable defences of the respondents wherein she had observed that " In Democratic India, media has virtually evolved as the fourth pillar of the Constitution and plays a very vital role in forming public opinion in favour of or against the government policies and in exposing or surfacing the corrupt practices where they exists. This helps in assessing the performance of the government on the anvil of honesty, integrity, efficiency and public interest, by the electorate. In the present case, whether the ministry of coal adhered to fair practices in allocation of coal blocks to the companies or was guided by some other external or extraneous factors is a matter of public and CR No. 57/2/14 28/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . national interest as the hard earned money of the tax payers as well as a valuable natural resources of the country are involved. " 36 In this regard, firstly, it is to be noted that as observed herein above, the Ld. MM had no business at all to make any such comments or observations in respect of Government's policy decisions which were not even under challenge before her and thus she had clearly exceeded her jurisdiction because even the CAG in its report quoted by the petitioner before it as a mere passing reference had also not talked about any scam being committed in allocation of those mines by the Government to any of the Stake holders much less the petitioner. All that CAG had opined in the said report was that if some transparency could have been observed and allocation would have been made by bidding system, then it could have fetched more revenue to the Government and would also have prevented the concentration of wealth in a fewer hands. However, CAG, no where had leveled any allegation of any corrupt or malpractice on the part of either petitioner or Government being adopted in making the said allotment/allocation of the coal mines at any point of time whatsoever. 37 Further, though the Ld. MM had observed in the impugned order that law of defamation could not be used as a weapon to silence the critics, but she had also lost sight of the fact as to whether the impugned articles were written only as an innocent expression of opinion of the author or were written to be CR No. 57/2/14 29/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . used as a tool to take revenge from the petitioner and its Board of Directors for their actions of prosecuting the officials of media houses for the offence of extortion and black mailing. 38 Further, I find that Ld. MM had erroneously held that the author of the article had no knowledge that it was likely to cause harm to the petitioner because the article per­se contained factually unproved assertions and at the end of it, it had virtually amounted to announcing a verdict against the petitioner and its Managing Director when it had observed that the money earned by scam, could not have brought true legitimacy to any one (referring to Naveen Jindal getting a School of Management at University of Texas and Dallas (UTD) being named in his name). 39 It is to be noted here that till date, no competent court in the country had given any judicial verdict regarding illegal money either being invested or extracted from those allocation of coal blocks. 40 Further, I find that the Ld. MM had failed to exercise her jurisdiction in a judicious manner when she had gone to the extent of observing that " the court has to protect the media as they have a moral, legal and social duty to perform, if what is published is in public interest or public good and is based on a factual report which though may be capable of being perceived differently by different individuals." and in the last para as appearing at page 11 of the impugned order and from the observations made CR No. 57/2/14 30/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . therein, it seems that the Ld. MM had gone to the extent of giving weightage to the media trial of the accused conducted by big media houses and while doing so, the Ld. MM had completely ignored the fact that such media trials were not based on a judicial verdict given by the court of law in the country on the issues raised and agitated before them. Hence, I also find further findings of the Ld. MM to be grossly erroneous which are appearing at opening para at page 12 of the impugned order which are as under: " One must not forget that the country is striding towards an era where the right to information and the right to know have been given statutory backing and are constantly evolving. In these circumstances, any action towards gagging the free media would push the country back to the colonial dark ages of closed doors and hushed up voices." 41 However, I have no hesitation in holding that such articles published without verification of the facts from the side against whom such publications were made are clearly per­se derogatory and defamatory in nature and are even contempts of the superior court's directions as contained in the Blitz's case (supra), as discussed above, which judgment still holds good in respect of setting guiding principles for the print media in reporting any matter through such articles in public interest. 42 In view of the above lengthy discussion, I have no hesitation in holding CR No. 57/2/14 31/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors . that the impugned order as passed by the Ld. MM, is not sustainable in law as it suffers from vital illegalities and irregularities. 43 Accordingly the revision petition, as filed by the petitioner is allowed and the the impugned order is set aside as prima facie there is sufficient material to summon the respondents no. 2 to 5 for the offences committed by them and also to put them to trial for the same. 44 The case is remanded back to the Ld. Trial Court through Ld. CMM, New Delhi with direction to the Ld. MM to summon the accused persons for the offences under section 500 IPC and thereafter pass a final judgment after appreciating the entire evidence which shall be brought on record to her notice by the respective parties at the appropriate stages of trial. 39 TCR, if any, be sent back to the Ld. Trial Court alongwith a copy of the order. 40 File of the revision petition be consigned to record room after completion of all other necessary formalities. Announced in the open Court on 13.11.2014 (LOKESH KUMAR SHARMA) ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE­04 NEW DELHI DISTRICT/ PATIALA HOUSE COURTS/NEW DELHI CR No. 57/2/14 32/32 M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd Vs State & Ors .