Angele G. Pereira vs Dr. Leon D'Souza And Another on 3 July, 1997 Equivalent citations: 1998BOMCR(CRI)~, 1998CRILJ569 Author: Vishnu Sahai Bench: Vishnu Sahai ORDER Vishnu Sahai, J. 1. By means of this petition, preferred under section 482 Cr.P.C., the petitioner (Orig. Accused) has prayed that the proceedings in Criminal Complaint Case No. 171/S of 1991, (under sections 499 and 500 I.P.C.), arising out of a complaint filed against him on 15-4-1991, by the respondent No. 1, in the Court of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, 37th Court, Esplanade, Bombay, be quashed. 2. The allegations in brief as unfolded in the complaint are that the complainant (respondent No. 1) Dr. Leon D'Souza, was the President of Catholic Gymkhana Club, Bombay, in the year ending on 26-9-1990. On the said date, in the Annual General Meeting, the petitioner Angelo Pereira, was elected as President. While the complainant was President, a contract had been given by the Managing Committee to one Seltzer Pinto, a member of the club, for running a permit room. The said contract was terminating on 1-10-1990. Bearing in mind the convenience of the members of the club, the Managing Committee of which, the complainant was President, executed a fresh contract with Seltzer Pinto. As mentioned earlier, on 26-9-1990, the petitioner got elected as President. He did not permit Seltzer Pinto, to run the permit room on the basis of the previous contract. Consequently, Seltzer Pinto filed a suit in the City Civil Court at Bombay, bearing Short Cause Suit No. 7936 of 1990, against the club for various reliefs. By letter dated 3-12-1990, Seltzer Pinto informed the complainant that as the City Civil Court had not granted ad interim reliefs, he had preferred an appeal in the High Court. In the said letter, Seltzer Pinto also informed the complainant that the petitioner had filed an affidavit in the High Court making defamatory allegations against him. Paras 3, 4, 6 and 8 of the said affidavit are reproduced in the complaint and the burden of the song in them, is that the previous Managing Committee, of which the complainant was President, had acted fraudulently and in collusion with Seltzer Pinto so that he could have unfair advantage. It is alleged in the complaint that the said averments in the said paras, are defamatory. Consequently, in para 12 of the complaint, it is stated that the original accused Angele Pereira, (petitioner) had committed an offence under sections 499 I.PC., which is punishable under section 500 I.P.C. 3. It appears that after filing of the complaint and the usual verification, the original accused (petitioner) Angelo Pereira, was summoned in the Court of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, 37th Court, Esplanade, Bombay, for offences under sections 499 and 500 I.PC. The summoning order however, has not been annexed with this petition. 4. I have heard Mr, P.V. Satha for the petitioner, Mr. Milind Kamble, for the respondent No. 1 and Mr. R.Y. Mirza, Additional Public Prosecutor for the respondent No. 2. The contention of Mr. Sathe is that since the case of the petitioner falls within the Exception 8th and 9th to section 499 I.P.C., the entire proceedings against the petitioner, arising out of Complaint Case No. 171/S/1991, are an abuse of process of Court and deserve to be quashed. On the other hand, contention of Mr. Kamble, Counsel for the respondent No. 1 is that the question of applicability of the Exceptions to section 499 I.P.C., cannot be gone into at this stage, and can only be decided after evidence has been adduced in the trial Court. 5. I find merit in Mr. Kamble's submission. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case , Balraj Khanna and others appellants v. Moti Ram, respondent, cited by Mr. Kamble, has observed thus in para 30 thus :--- "It is needless to state that the question of applicability of the Exceptions to section 499 I.P.C., as well as all other defences that may be available to the appellants, will have to be gone into during the trial of the complaint." 6. It needs to be emphasised that ordinarily the complaint and the proceedings arising therefrom can only be quashed by this Court, in exercise of its inherent powers under section 482 of Criminal Procedure Code, if the averments alleged in the complaint, unrebutted do not make out an offence. See R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab , and Municipal Corporation of Delhi appellant v. Ram Kishan Rohatgi and others respondents. In the latter decision in para 10, Supreme Court thus observed :--- "It is therefore manifestly clear that proceedings against accused in the initial stages can be quashed only if on the face of the complaint or the papers accompanying the same, no offence is constituted. In other words, the test is that taking the allegations and the complaint as they are without adding or subtracting anything, if no offence is made out, then the High Court will be justified in quashing the proceedings in exercise of its powers under section 482 of present Code." 7. In my view, the averments as disclosed in the complaint make out a prima facie offence under section 499 I.P.C. against the petitioner. 8. In the result, this petition stands dismissed. Rule is discharged. Interim order is vacated. Since the proceedings are more than 6 1/2 years old, it would be expedient in the interest of justice, if they are disposed off as expeditiously as possible by the trial Court; preferably within 6 months from today. I direct the original complainant Dr. Leon D'Souza, and original accused Angelo Pereira, to put in their appearance in the Court of the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, 37th Court. Esplanade, Bombay on 24-7-1997. Office is directed to send a copy of my judgment to the said Court by or before 18-7-1997. I may make it clear that whatever observations I have made, are only relevant to the disposal of the present application and would not influence the trial Court while deciding the case. 9. Revision petition dismissed.