Senthil Kumar vs / Author: V.Sivagnanam Bench: V.Sivagnanam Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS RESERVED ON : 04.09.2023 PRONOUNCED ON: 25.09.2023 CORAM THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE V.SIVAGNANAM Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 and Crl.M.P.Nos.16103 & 16104 of 2019 Senthil Kumar ... Petitioner /vs/ 1.State Rep.by The Inspector of Police Namakkal Police Station, Namakkal (Ref.Cr.No.725/2015) 2.C.Chinnadurai ... Respondents Prayer : Criminal Original Petition has been filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the records and quash the proceeding P.R.C. No.1 of 2016 on the file of the learned Judicial Magistrate No.1, Namakkal for offences under Section 3(1)(x) of the Schedule Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 & 352 IPC . For Petitioner ... Mr.N.Manoharan for Mr.V.Sakkarapani For Respondent ... Mr.L.Baskaran No.1 Govt.Advocate (Crl.side) For Respondent ... Mr.T.Mohan No.2 Senior Counsel for Mr.G.Mutharasu Page 1 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 ORDER Challenging the criminal proceedings in P.R.C.No.1 of 2016 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.I, Namakkal, the present criminal original petition has been filed. 2.The prosecution case is that the defacto complainant/second respondent is a retired Driver from the Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation. He entered into a real estate business along with the first accused Perumal and another person. For the business purpose, he borrowed a sum of Rs. 6 lakhs from the Sivaganga Finance by mortgaging his property as a collateral security on 29.11.2010 and handed over the said amount to the first accused Perumal as his share for the business. Thereafter, they had purchased a land bearing survey Nos.414 & 415 at Velayuthampalayam Village near TNPL, Karur District for a total extent of 1.80 acres. After dividing them as plots, sold some portions. After the sale, the defacto complainant’s share amount was not settled by the first Accused. He demanded his share amount from the first accused. The first accused Perumal informed the defacto complainant to visit his office on Page 2 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 24.12.2014. The defacto complainant/second respondent along with his friends had visited the office of Perumal, where, the defacto complainant was abused by the first accused Perumal and his son Senthil Kumar (A2) the petitioner herein and insulted the defacto complainant by saying his caste name and the petitioner herein also pushed him forcibly. Thereafter, the defacto complainant went to the police station and narrated the alleged incident and gave a complaint to take action against the petitioner and his father Perumal. In pursuance of the complaint made, a case has been registered in Crime No.725 of 2015 for the offences punishable under Sections 3(1)(x) of SC/ST Act and 352 IPC . After investigation, final report has been filed and the case was taken on file as P.R.C.No.1 of 2016. Since this petitioner A2 has not appeared before the Court, the case against the first accused Perumal has been split up by the proceedings of the Principal Sessions Judge, Namakkal in D.No.169 of 2020 dated 16.03.2020 and new number has been assigned as Spl.S.C.No.10 of 2021 and the petitioner case is pending as P.R.C.No.1 of 2016, it is challenged now. Page 3 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 3.The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner is an Engineering graduate (Stream:Electronics) and employed with a global firm in United Kingdom since 2010, who does not have any bad antecedents. He came to India on 14.12.2014 to visit his parents, who are suffering from medical ailments and stayed in India only for 15 days. Further, he returned back to London on 31.12.2014 from Bangalore Airport. The petitioner does not know the defacto complainant and no such occurrence took place. The present complaint is filed only with a motive to pressurize the petitioner's father and to extract money from him. 4.Further, the learned counsel submitted that the defacto complainant had filed another complaint on 09.01.2016 alleging that while he was going to the temple, the first accused Perumal had abused him by saying his caste name in the public place and the same was witnessed by two persons. The respondent police had registered the first information Report in Cr.No.89 of 2016 for offences under Section 352 IPC & Section 3(1)(x) The schedule caste & Schedule Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Page 4 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 Act. In this regard, enquiry conducted, 161 statements were recorded and found that no such alleged occurrence had occurred. The defacto complainant had misused the provisions of the special Act. The report was forwarded to Government Advocate and to the Members of Protection of Abuse and Vigilance Team. After receiving their opinions, the District Collector, Namakkal, had closed the complaint. The relevant portion from the proceedings of Na.Ka.No:1224/2016/D3 are extracted hereunder: “”rk;gt ,lj;jpy; ,Ue;j rhl;rpfis tprhuiz nkw;bfhz;ljpy; thjpjhd; bgUkhsplk; ntz;Lbkd;nw jfuhW bra;J mtiu js;spa[s;sJk;. gpd;g[ m';fpUe;jth;fs; mth;fis rkhjhdk; gLj;jpa[s;sJk; tprhuizapy; bjhpatUfpwJ/ thjp ntz;Lbkd;nw $hjp bgaiu brhy;yp jpl;oajhft[k;. vr;rpy; Jg;gpajhft[k; g[fhh; bfhLj;jhy; jhd; eltof;if vLg;ghh;fs; vd rl;lj;ij jdf;F rhjfkhf gad;gLj;jp bfhs;s. ,t;thwhd g[fhh; bfhLj;Js;shh; vd;gJ tprhuziapy; bjspthf bjhpa tUfpwJ vd;Wk; jdJ ,Wjp mwpf;ifapy; fhty; Jizf;fz;fhzpg;ghsh; bjhptpj;Js;shh;/” Page 5 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 5.The learned counsel further submitted that investigating agency has found that the defacto complainant has misused the provisions of the Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act and preferred the said complaint and the defacto complainant has not approached the authorities with clean hands and the same would apply to the present complaint also. In this regard, the petitioner relies on the dictum of Ravinder Sing Vs. Sukhbir Singh & Ors on 11 January, 2013 the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that the malicious prosecution cannot be allowed to continue. The relevant portions are extracted hereunder for easy reference A person cannot be permitted to unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. Ex debito justitiae is inbuild in the inherent power of the court and the whole ideal is to do real, complete and substantial justice for which the courts exist. Thus, it becomes the paramount duty of the court to protect an apparently innocent person, not to be subjected to prosecution on the basis of wholly untenable complaint. In view of the above, the judgment of the High Court impugned herein dated 14.12.2011 as well as of the Page 6 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 Revisional Court is set aside. Order of the Metopolitan Magistrate dated 13.08.2009 is restored. The complaint filed by respondent No.1 under the provisions of Section 3(1)(viii) of the Act 1989 is hereby quashed. The appeal is thus allowed. The above judgment squarely applies to the case on hand. 6.Further, the learned counsel contended that as per the First Information Report dated 07.10.2015 in Cr.No.725 of 2015 the said alleged occurrence took place in Geethanjali Finance situated at Namakkal Main Road but in the CSR the place of occurrence as Maruthi Driving School, Paramathi Road and the same was received and signed by the defacto complainant. Further, rough sketch was prepared by the investigation officer. To prove the same, the prosecution relies on two witnesses namely Mohd.Mustafa & Kumar. As per investigation officer, the place of occurrence is situated at Namakkal Main Road above the Samrat Footwear owned by Mohd.Mustafa and he confirms the same. However, the another witness namely Kumar had stated in contrary to the above as if the occurrence took place above his shop situated Page 7 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 Thiruchengode Main Road, Namakkal. This uncertainty in the place of occurrence creates a doubt in the prosecution case. 7.The learned counsel further contended that the main ingredient required to attract the offence of 3(1)(x) of SC & ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act is the Intentional insult or intimidates with intent to humiliate the member of Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe. From the above, it is very clear that intention is sine qua non to attract the offence. In the present case, no such occurrence had taken place, even as per the version defacto complainant there is neither intentional insult nor intimidation with intent to humiliate has been caused by the petitioner. To attract the offence, the act has to be committed with intention in a public view. The second ingredient of commission of crime in public view is also absent. Hence, the prosecution falsely initiated for offence under 3(1)(x) of SC & ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act . To attract the offence of Section 352 IPC, the petitioner should have either committed the offence Assault (Sec 351 IPC ) or Criminal Force (Sec 350 IPC ). Further submitted that in the final report, offence of Assault is not made out as there is no Page 8 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 gesture made. Further to attract the offence of criminal force intentionally force must be used. To support his argument, the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gorige Pentaiah Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and other reported in (2008) 12 Supreme Court Cases 531, Asmathunnisa Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh represented by the public prosecutor, High Court of Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad and another reported in (2011) 11 Supreme Court Cases 259, Hitesh Verma Vs. State of Uttarakhand and another reported in (2020) 10 Supreme Court Cases 710 and thus pleaded to quash the proceedings in P.R.C.No.1 of 2016 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.I, Namakkal for the offences under Sections 3(1)(x) of the Schedule Casts and The Scheduled Tribes (prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 & 352 IPC against the petitioner and to allow the criminal original petition. 8.The learned Government Advoate (crl.side) appearing for the first respondent submitted that there are sufficient evidences to proceed against the petitioner (A2) along with his father Perumal (A1) and before commencement of trial, it is not proper to quash the criminal proceedings Page 9 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 against the petitioner (A2) since there is a sufficient materials available to proceed against the petitioner. 9.The learned counsel appearing for the second respondent/defacto complainant supported the argument of the learned Government Advocate (Crl.side) appearing for the first respondent and also contended that defence of the accused is to be tested after appreciating the evidence during trial. While hearing application under Section 482 Cr.P.C, the High Court has no jurisdiction to appreciate the statement of witnesses and record a finding that there were inconsistencies in their statement, the same could be done only in trial while deciding the issues on merit. To support his argument, the learned counsel relied upon the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Central Bureau of Investigation Vs. Arvind Khanna reported inn (2019) 10 Supreme Court Cases 686 and Devendra Prasad Singh Vs. State of Bihar and another reported in (2019) 4 Supreme Court Cases 351, M.Jayanthi Vs. K.R.Meenakshi and another reported in 2019 SCC OnLine SC 2058 and also the other judgments of this Court in (Crl.O.P.(MD) No.15186 of 2021 (Mohan Vs. The state represented by Page 10 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 the Superintendent of Police, Vanniyampatti Vilakku, Virudhunagar District) and Crl.O.P.No.20922 of 2019 (Iyyanar @ Thadi Iyaanar and four others Vs. State, represented by its, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Puducherry West, Puducherry and three othrs.) 10.I have considered the matter in the light of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the materials available on records. 11.On perusal of the records, it is seen that the petitioner is the second accused in P.R.C.No.1 of 2016 and another accused Perumal (A1) was the father of this petitioner. In pursuance of a complaint given by the defacto complainant, the second respondent herein on 07.10.2015, the case has been registered for the incident took place on 24.12.2014. Per se the delay is not disputed. Further, it is also not disputed that the defacto complainant /the second respondent, after his retirement as a Driver from the Tamil Nadu State Transport Corporation in the year 2010, jointly run a Real Estate Business along with the first accused Perumal. For the Real Page 11 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 Estate Business, the defacto complainant by mortgaging his property at Sivaganga Finance, Namakkal, borrowed a sum of Rs.6 lakhs and put it in the real estate business along with the first accused Perumal. Further, it is disputed that from that amount, they have purchased a property at Velayuthampalayam Village near the paper Mill at Survey Nos.414 & 415 to the extent of 0.90 cents. Thereafter, divided into plots and sold to various persons. In this business, the defacto complainant’s share was not settled. Due to the non settlement of the defacto complainant's share in the real estate business, he asked Perumal (A1) to settle the amount. On 23.12.2014 for that, the first accused Perumal asked him to come to Geethanjali Finance on the next day i.e. 24.12.2014. On 24.12.2014 at about 11.00 am. the defacto complainant /second respondent went to the Geenthajali Finance along with his friends Vijayakumar and Sitaraman. They are cited as LW2 and LW3 as witnesses in the final report. At that time, in the Geethanjali Finance, the first accused Perumal and the petitioner (A2) Perumal’s son Senthil Kumar and other partners Vidyanandharaj LW4, Subramanian LW5, were present. While asking to settle his money, the first accused Perumal uttered the following words; Page 12 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 “”nkw;go bgUkhsplk; vdJ gzj;ija[k;, kPjp epyj;ija[k; bfhL';fs; vd nfl;lnghJ nkw;go bgUkhs; eP vd;d bghpa g[L';fpahlh. nghw ,lbky;yhk; te;J gzj;ij bfhL vd nfl;fpw Vz;lh rf;fpyp ehna cdf;F mt;tst[ Jhuk; MapLr;rh. cd;idbay;yhk; g';Fjhuuhf nrh;j;njd; ghUlh. ,J vd; jg;g[ cdf;F fhR. gzk; Vjk; ju KoahJ/ eP vtd;fpl;l ntz;LkhdhYk; nghlh ghj;Jf;fyhk;/ ,';F ,Ue;J btspna ngh vd;W vd;id kpul;odhh;/” 12.Further, the petitioner (A2) also uttered the following words: “mg;nghJ mtuJ kfd; bre;jpy;Fkhh; ahUfpl;nl te;J vd;d ngrnw btspna nghlh rf;fpyg; gany vd;W vd;id te;J js;spdhh;/ vd;Dila ez;ghf;s Kd;dpiyapYk; kw;;Wk; m';fpUe;jth;f Kd;dpiyapYk; nkw;go bgUkhs; kw;Wk; mtuJ kfd; bre;jpyFkhh; Mfpnahh; vd;id vdJ $hjp bgaiur; brhy;yp mtkjpj;J mof;f te;jjhy; ehDk; ntjidg;gl;L jpUk;g te;J tpl;nld;/” Page 13 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 13.A reading of the averment of the complaint, FIR and the final Report materials, it is noticed that the orgin of the incident was due to non settlement of the defacto complainant’s share in the real estate business. Therefore, the matter related to non settlement of the defacto complainant’s share in the real estate business along with the first accused father of the petitioner (A2). Hence, it is a dispute between the parties about the non settlement of real estate business share being the cause of use of alleged abusive language. In such a situations, the principles stated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Hitesh Verma Vs. State of Uttarakhand and another reported in (2020) 10 Supreme Court Cases 710 is to be considered and in the decision, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that “All insults or intimidations to a person will not be an offence under the Act unless such insult or intimidation is on account of victim belonging to Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe.” 14.In the instant case, the dispute between the parties is about the non settlement of defacto complainant’s share amount in the real estate business being the cause of use of alleged abusive language. Further, in Page 14 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 this case, another key ingredient of the provision of insult or intimidation in any place within public view is also not made out. According to the allegation, the alleged occurrence took place within the Geethanjali Finance in the presence of witnesses Vijayakumar and Sitaraman, they are admittedly friends to the defacto complainant and the other partners. There was no public were present at the time of the alleged incident. To that effect, there is no material in this case. Further, as per the materials available on record the final report, statement of witnesses and the rough sketch, the Geethanjali Finance is situated at Second floor of Samrat footwear. It cannot be seen inside of Finance from the Road. The rough sketch clearly reveals that the alleged place of occurrence Geethanjali Finance is at the upstairs of the Samrat Footwear. It is not easy to view from the Road or from the ground floor. As per the allegation in the FIR, the allegation of abusing the defacto complainant was within the four walls of Geethanjali Finance and there is no averment that there was members of public at the time of the incident except the defacto complainant’s two friends and other partners of the business. Therefore, the basic ingredient that the words were uttered in any place within the public view, public is Page 15 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 not made out. In the list of witnesses to the charge sheet the named two witnesses Vijaya Kumar and Sitaraman are admittedly friends of the defacto complainant and other two witnesses are partners of the business. Those were present within the four walls of the Geethanjali Finance. At this circumstances, the principles stated by the Supreme Court in Swaran Singh V. State reported in (2008) 8 SCC 435 is to be applied in this case. 15.Further to attract the offence under Section 352 IPC, there is no material to show that the petitioner assaulted the defacto complainant or used to criminal force. Under such circumstances, a principle stated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bhajan Lal case with regard to the scope of the inherent power of the High Court in interfering with the criminal proceedings is taken to be consideration. Further, the Supreme Court in Gorige Pentaiah Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and others reported in (2008) 12 Supreme Court Cases 531 considered the scope and ambit of Courts powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C and observed as follows: “12. This Court in a number of cases has laid down Page 16 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 the scope and ambit of courts' powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. Every High Court has inherent power to act ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice, for the administration of which alone it exists, or to prevent abuse of the process of the court. Inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. can be exercised: (i) to give effect to an order under the Code; (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. Inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. though wide have to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with great caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down in this section itself. Authority of the court exists for the advancement of justice. If any abuse of the process leading to injustice is brought to the notice of the court, then the Court would be justified in preventing injustice by invoking inherent powers in absence of specific provisions in the Statute. Discussion of decided cases Page 17 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 13. Reference to the following cases would reveal that the courts have consistently taken the view that they must use this extraordinary power to prevent injustice and secure the ends of justice. The English courts have also used inherent power to achieve the same objective. It is generally agreed that the Crown Court has inherent power to protect its process from abuse. In Connelly v. DPP [1964] AC 1254, Lord Devlin stated that where particular criminal proceedings constitute an abuse of process, the court is empowered to refuse to allow the indictment to proceed to trial. Lord Salmon in DPP v. Humphrys [1977] AC 1 stressed the importance of the inherent power when he observed that it is only if the prosecution amounts to an abuse of the process of the court and is oppressive and vexatious that the judge has the power to intervene. He further mentioned that the court's power to prevent such abuse is of great constitutional importance and should be jealously preserved. 14. In R.P. Kapur v. State of PunjabMANU/SC/0086/1960 : 1960CriLJ1239 , this Court summarized some categories of cases where inherent power can and should be exercised to quash the proceedings: (i) where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar Page 18 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 against the institution or continuance of the proceedings; (ii) where the allegations in the first information report or complaint taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not constitute the offence alleged; (iii) where the allegations constitute an offence, but there is no legal evidence adduced or the evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. 15. The powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. The court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. The High Court should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where all the facts are incomplete and hazy; more so, when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of such magnitude that they cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceedings at any stage. Page 19 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 16. This Court in State of Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy observed that the wholesome power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. entitles the High Court to quash a proceeding when it comes to the conclusion that allowing the proceeding to continue would be an abuse of the process of the court or that the ends of justice require that the proceeding ought to be quashed. The High Courts have been invested with inherent powers, both in civil and criminal matters, to achieve a salutary public purpose. A court proceeding ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a weapon of harassment or persecution. The court observed in this case that ends of justice are higher than the ends of mere law though justice must be administered according to laws made by the legislature. This case has been followed in a large number of subsequent cases of this Court and other courts. 17. In Chandrapal Singh and Ors. v. Maharaj Singh , in a landlord and tenant matter where criminal proceedings had been initiated, this Court observed in SCC at p.467, para 1 as under: “1.A frustrated landlord after having met his waterloo in the hierarchy of civil courts, has further enmeshed the tenant in a frivolous criminal prosecution which prima facie Page 20 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 appears to be an abuse of the process of law. The facts when stated are so telling that the further discussion may appear to be superfluous” The court noticed that the tendency of perjury is very much on the increase. Unless the courts come down heavily upon such persons, the whole judicial process would come to ridicule. The court also observed that chagrined and frustrated litigants should not be permitted to give vent to their frustration by cheaply invoking jurisdiction of the criminal court. 18. This Court in Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia and Ors. v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre observed in para 7 as under:(SCC p.695) 7. The legal position is well settled that when a prosecution at the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie establish the offence. It is also for the court to take into consideration any special features which appear in a particular case to consider whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a prosecution to continue. This is so on the basis that the court cannot be utilized for any oblique purpose and Page 21 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 where in the opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction is bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the court may while taking into consideration the special facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at a preliminary stage. 19. In State of Haryana and Ors v. Bhajan Lal and Ors. this Court in the backdrop of interpretation of various relevant provisions of the Cr.P.C . under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or the inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. gave the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of the court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Thus, this Court made it clear that it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list to myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised:(SCC pp.378- 79, para 102) (1) Where the allegations made in the first Page 22 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 information report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused. (2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code. (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused. (4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code. (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the Page 23 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party. (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge. 20. This Court in Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary observed thus:(SCC p.355, para 132) 132. The criminal courts are clothed with inherent power to make such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice. Such power though unrestricted and undefined should not be capriciously or arbitrarily exercised, but Page 24 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 should be exercised in appropriate cases, ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone the courts exist. The powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plentitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. Courts must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. 21. In G. Sagar Suri and Anr. v. State of UP , this Court observed that it is the duty and obligation of the criminal court to exercise a great deal of caution in issuing the process particularly when matters are essentially of civil nature. 22. This Court in Roy V.D. v. State of Kerala observed thus: 18. It is well settled that the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C has to be exercised by the High Court, inter alia, to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. Where criminal proceedings are initiated based on illicit material collected on search and arrest which are per se illegal and vitiate not only a conviction and sentence based on such material but also the trial itself, the proceedings cannot be allowed to go on as it cannot but amount to abuse of the process of the court; in Page 25 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 such a case not quashing the proceedings would perpetuate abuse of the process of the court resulting in great hardship and injustice to the accused. In our opinion, exercise of power under Section 482 CrPC to quash proceedings in a case like the one on hand, would indeed secure the ends of justice. 23. This Court in Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. and Ors. v. Mohd. Sharaful Haque observed thus: 8....It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers, court would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted in toto. 24. In Indian Oil Corporation v. NEPC India Ltd. , this Page 26 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 Court again cautioned about a growing tendency in business circles to convert purely civil disputes into criminal cases. The court noticed the prevalent impression that civil law remedies are time consuming and do not adequately protect the interests of lenders/creditors. The court further observed that: (SCC p.749, para 13) "13....Any effort to settle civil disputes and claims, which do not involve any criminal offence, by applying pressure through criminal prosecution should be deprecated and discouraged." 16.In this case, the non settlement of the defacto complainant’s share in the real estate business along with petitioner’s father A1 Perumal and no way connected with this petitioner. It is a dispute between the defacto complainant and the petitioner's father Perumal (A1), therefore, the case against this petitioner by applying pressure through criminal prosecution should be deprecated and discouraged. 17.In view of the above, filing of the complaint against this Page 27 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 petitioner in the instant case is a total abuse of process of law and criminal proceedings in P.R.No.1 of 2016 is also total abuse of process of law. It meets the parameter laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above cited cases. In view of the above facts, I find that the complaint against this petitioner is a frivolous complaint and the charge against the petitioner under Section 3(1)(x) of the SC/ST Act and 352 IPC are not made out. Consequently, the criminal proceedings against this petitioner is hereby quashed and the criminal original petition is allowed. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed. Index : Yes/No Internet : Yes/No 25.09.2023 sms To 1.The learned Judicial Magistrate No.1, Namakkal. 2.State Rep.by The Inspector of Police Namakkal Police Station, Namakkal (Ref.Cr.No.725/2015) 3.The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras. V.SIVAGNANAM ,J. sms Page 28 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 Pre-delivery order made in Crl.O.P.No.29880 of 2019 and Crl.M.P.Nos.16103 & 16104 of 2019 25.09.2023 Page 29 of 29 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis