Page 1 Of 9 V P Kumar vs . Sushil Kumar Shinde on 2 July, 2013 Page 1 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde IN THE COURT OF SH. AMITABH RAWAT, MM-08 (SE) SAKET COURTS COMPLEX: NEW DELHI CC No. : 99/1/2013 P.S : Lajpat Nagar V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde Unique Case ID No.02406R0021842013 02.07.2013 Present : Complainant in person. ORDER ON SUMMONING 1. In the instant case complainant has prayed for summoning of respondent as an accused for the alleged offences punishable under Section 153, 298, 499 and 505(2) IPC . 2. I have considered the submission made by learned counsel for complainant and perused the entire case file. 3. In the pre-summoning evidence, Sh V P Kumar, complainant examined himself as CW1 on 28.01.2013 and has deposed as under:- 'I am the complainant in this case. I am a free lancing educational consultant having M B A qualification. I had, on 21.01.2013, watched INDIA TV channel in which the proposed accused Sushil Kumar Shinde made derogatory, objectionable and defamatory remarks at Congress Party Chintan Shivir, at Jaipur, Rajasthan against Hindus with an intention to cause ill- will and hatred against the Hindus. He had in the said speech stated that BJP and RSS were promoting Hindu terrorism. He later on, in the press conference stated that he was just referring to the media reports and he was referring to Saffron terrorism. I was outraged to hear the statement of the proposed accused, the CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 2 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde Home Minister of India, as they were derogatory and insulting to 90 Crores Hindus including myself as Hindus respect the Saffron colour, which is also used in our National Flag. By his said statement, the proposed accused has hurt the feelings of the Hindus by attaching terrorism to the word Hindu, which is sacred for us. The said statement has been reported in the Media in Times of India dated 21.01.2013, Hindu dated 21.01.2013, Dainik Jagran dated 21.01.2013, Pioneer dated 22.01.2013, Dainik Jagran dated 22.01.2013. The said reports of different newspapers are Ex.CW1/A to Ex.CW1/E respectively. I had also watched the statement of the proposed accused on YOUTUBE and the complete recording of both the statements has been filed in the case record in the form of a PEN DRIVE, the same is Mark A. By his derogatory and defamatory statement Hindus have been maligned and even a terrorist Hafiz Saeed, the founder of the terrorist organization LeT, has stated that India is promoting terrorism. The statement of the proposed accused has incited and provoked the religious feelings of the Hindus, and which also led to demonstrations throughout the country against the said statement of the proposed accused. It has also labelled all Indians and particularly Hindus who go abroad for studies/ business/settling abroad as terrorists and put a risk on their lives by maligning their name with terrorism. The copy of the report in newspaper 'The News Tribe' is Mark B. Even if it is assumed that a few people belonging to any community did anything wrong, the entire community whether it is Hindus, Muslims or anyone else, cannot be maligned by attaching the word terrorism to their community. I being an Hindu have been hurt and my religious feelings also hurt and even I have been maligned and defamed. The said statements were made by the proposed accused in the Chintan Shivir of the Congress Party at Jaipur, Rajasthan and the proposed accusing being the Home Minister of India, is assigned with the duty to promote harmony among community and not ill-will or hatred and he has violated his duty and caused the defamation, ill-will and hatred against the Hindus.' CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 3 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde 4. The complainant again re-examined himself under Section 311 Cr P C on 18.02.2013 and has deposed as under:- 'I state that I have annexed a Pen-drive alongwith my complaint case in the list of documents to prove the statement of the accused in the Hon'ble Court. I have seen the interview of the accused on the website www.youtube.com wherein the said interview is available, whose link is http://www.youtube.com/ watch?V=pe-XK6oCxtE. I downloaded this link on my computer, which I have been regularly using to store and process information for the purpose of all activities regularly carried on over the period of time and I have lawful control over the use of this computer. I further state that recording of abovesaid interview of the accused in the pen drive, which has been exhibited in this court alongwith the complaint at Page No.21. I have also annexed snap shot of the screen presence of the said link and the interview. That during the said period information and electronic record was regularly fed into the computer in the ordinary course of activities. That throughout the material part of the said period the computer was operating properly and there was no defect in the computer system for the last one year. The Pen drive is played, which is heard and seen in the Open Court and same is kept on the record again.' Learned counsel has also filed certain judgments in support of her case. 5. Before adverting to contents of evidence & complaint and juxtaposing them with the sections/offences alleged, it would be in the fitness of things to refer to the relevant extract from the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in M/s Pepsi Foods Ltd Vs Special Judicial Magistrate, (SC ) 1998 A.I.R. (SC) 128 where it was held that:- "Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is serious CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 4 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of course. It is not that the complainant has to bring only two witnesses to support his allegations in the complaint to have the criminal law set into motion. The order of the Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. He has to examine the nature of allegations made in the complaint and the evidence both oral and documentary in support thereof and that would be sufficient for the complainant to succeed in bringing charge home to the accused . It is not that the Magistrate is a silent spectator at the time of recording of preliminary evidence before summoning of the accused. Magistrate has to carefully scrutinies the evidence brought on record and may even himself put questions to the complainant and his witnesses to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the allegations or otherwise and then examine if any offence is prima facie committed by all or any of the accused." 6. Thus, the pre-summoning evidence and contents of the complaint have to be sifted to see if the offences as alleged are prima facie made out or not, as summoning of a person in criminal offences entails serious consequences. 7. The complainant has prayed for summoning of the proposed accused Sushil Kumar Shinde for the offences under Sections 153 , 298 , 499 and 505(2) IPC. 8. In nutshell, the complainant has alleged that the proposed accused stated that it is the BJP and RSS whose training camp are promoting CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 5 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde Hindu terrorism. The contents of the statement made by the proposed accused as put in pen drive has also been heard wherein he stated to have said that BJP and RSS promoting Hindu terrorism and he had linked it up with Samjhota blast, Mecca Masjid and Malegaon blast. He has thereafter, alleged to have used/amended the word saffron terrorism. 9. Learned counsel for complainant has argued that the complainant V P Kumar has been defamed due to said utterances of the accused and thus, should be summoned for the offences punishable under Section 499 IPC. 10. Section 499 IPC deals with defamation. It is caused if by words spoken or intended to be read or by signs or visible representations imputation concerning any person is made or published. Such making or publication must be with intention to harm or knowledge or having reason to believe that it will cause harm to the reputation of such person. If the statement of the proposed accused is read, it is seen that he is referring to BJP or RSS and that that allegedly certain members linked to them have been alleged to be involved in some activity. By such statement, it cannot be said that complainant has been defamed in any way. The words stated are general in nature and they are not referring to the complainant or any one in particular. The proposed accused has not said anything against the complainant, which would harm his reputation. In defamation the imputation must be specific and against any particular person, which is not in this case. The complainant has also not claimed any evidence that he is either a member of BJP or RSS. Thus, the ingredients of Section 499 IPC are not fulfilled. CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 6 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde 11. Secondly, the complainant has submitted that offence under Section 153 IPC is also made out. Section 153 IPC states that whoever malignantly, or wantonly, by doing anything which is illegal, gives provocation to any person intending or knowing that it is likely that such provocation will cause the offence of rioting. Thus, for the offence under Section 153 IPC, it has to be clear that an act is done malignantly or wantonly and is an illegal act. Furthermore, the provocation should be given with the intention or knowledge of causing riots. From the entire pre- summoning evidence and the contents of the statement, it cannot be said that the statement made by the proposed accused was intended or made with knowledge to cause riots. The giving of the statement and the provocation caused and its likelihood of causing riots must be direct and clear. The nature and the gravity of the statement and the utterances has to be considered and the ramification must also be directly linked to it. In the present case, it cannot be said that the intention/knowledge was to cause riots. Though, there may be undesirable choice of words, yet it cannot be stretched to the level that the statement had an intention to cause riot. Thus, ingredients of Section 153 IPC are also not made out. 12. Coming to Section 298 IPC, it punishes a person who utters any word with the deliberate intention of wounding the religious feelings of any person. This section also deals with wounding religious feelings. The statement made by the proposed accused is not a statement about any religion. He has stated about the Hindu terrorism by linking it up to Samjhota blast, CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 7 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde Mecca Masjid and Malegaon blast wherein some Hindus were involved. The interpretation of the complainant cannot form the basis of the ingredients of Section 298 IPC. There is nothing in the statement which shows deliberate intention to wound the religious feelings. Thus, the offence under Section 298 IPC is not made out. 13. Learned counsel has also argued about the Section 505 IPC dealing with public mischief and clause (b) and (c) deals any making or publishing any statement -- (b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or to any section of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence against the State or against the public tranquility; or (c) with intent to incite, or which is likely to incite, any class or community of persons to commit any offence against any other class or community. From the reading and listening of the entire statement of the proposed accused, it cannot be said that there was any intention to cause alarm whereby the people would commit the offence against the State or disturb the public tranquility. It was a statement made by one person belonging to one political party against the other party and there is nothing in the statement still which could connect it with causing or inciting any community to commit an offence against any other community. Thus, offence under Section 502 (2) IPC is also not made out. 14. The statement of the proposed accused seems to suggest linking CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 8 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde or some Hindu individuals to certain places and it cannot be construed as any incitement or even wounding religious feelings. The complainant has also deposed that consequent to the statement made by the proposed accused, Hafiz Saeed, founder of the terrorist organization LeT has stated that India is promoting terrorism. Now, in this connection, the alleged statement of the LeT, which is not even proved, even if admitted, has no bearing with the offences alleged in the present case. 15. The complainant has also suggested that the consequent to the issuing of the statement by the proposed accused, the Indians particularly, who go abroad for studies etc have their lives at risk. In this regard, one newspaper report has been was brought by the complainant. First of all, the linking of that killing as stated in that article (which is not proved) has no co- relation with offences alleged in the present case or the statement made by the proposed accused. As per the contents of the said article, the killing took place in USA because of the hatred of one individual because of the putting down of the Twin Towers in New York in the year 2001. Thus, there is nothing on record for linkage between the statement made by the proposed accused and the risking of the lives of the Hindus in general. 16. In view of the foregoing discussion, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that the complaint does not prima facie disclose the commission of any offence under the Indian Penal Code . 17. Thus, no case is made out for summoning of the proposed CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar Page 9 of 9 V P Kumar Vs. Sushil Kumar Shinde accused. Hence, the complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C is dismissed. File be consigned to record room on completion of the requisite formalities. Announced & dictated in (Amitabh Rawat) the Open Court on 02.07.2013. MM-08/South-East Saket Courts Complex, New Delhi CC No.99/1/2013 PS Lajpat Nagar