Prateek vs State on 5 September, 2007 Author: Harsha Devani Bench: Harsha Devani CR.MA/12967/2008 34/ 34 JUDGMENT IN THE HIGH COURT OF GUJARAT AT AHMEDABAD CRIMINAL MISC.APPLICATION No. 12967 of 2008 With CRIMINAL MISC.APPLICATION No. 13016 of 2008 For Approval and Signature: HONOURABLE MS.JUSTICE HARSHA DEVANI ========================================= 1 Whether Reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment ? 2 To be referred to the Reporter or not ? 3 Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy of the judgment ? 4 Whether this case involves a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the constitution of India, 1950 or any order made thereunder ? 5 Whether it is to be circulated to the civil judge ? ========================================= Prateek BIPIN BIHARILAL TANDON & 5 - Applicant(s) Versus STATE OF GUJARAT & 1 - Respondent(s) ========================================= Appearance : MR PM THAKKAR, SR. ADVOCATE with MR RAJESH M KALOTRA for M/S THAKKAR ASSOC. for Applicant(s) : 2, 5, MS KRINA CALLA, ADDL. PUBLIC PROSECUTOR for Respondent(s) : 1, MR IH SYED for MR SADIK A ANSARI for Respondent(s) : 2, ========================================= CORAM : HONOURABLE MS.JUSTICE HARSHA DEVANI Date : 17/04/2012 ORAL JUDGMENT By this application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as "the Code"), the applicants seek quashing of the first information report being Ghatlodiya Police Station I - C. R. No. 163/2008. The respondent No.2 - first informant lodged the above referred first information report against the applicants and other co-accused alleging commission of the offences punishable under sections 341 , 385 , 386 , 389 , 506(2) , 509 and 114 of the Indian Penal Code, stating that earlier from 9.9.2005 to 1.9.2007, she was working as Territory Sales Manager (Wealth Management Department) of Centurion Bank of Ahmedabad and, on 1.9.2007, a first information report being Ghatlodiya police station I - C. R. No.186/2007 came to be lodged against her and at the Ghatlodiya police station itself the concerned persons of the bank have given her a letter and terminated her services. It is alleged that on 1.9.2007 at about 09:45 hours in the morning, when she was present at her home, from the accused named in the first information report, Pratik Tandon along with two policemen and one policewoman came and informed her that a complaint had been lodged against her at Ghatlodiya Police Station, and asked her to go along with them. When they entered in the police station, Mayuresh Dube and Rajat Mishra were both present and without saying anything, they gave her a termination letter which had been prepared earlier, however, she refused to accept the same. At that time, at the police station, Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas, Dr. Haripriya, Vivek Mishra and Advocate Vadodariya started shouting loudly and putting questions after questions to her, but none of them were listening to her and she was taken to the Police Inspector Shri B. R. Patel and Shri Patel was furious with her and said that if she did not listen to them, she should be taken from there and put in the lock up. From there, the police took her to the room next to the computer room and made her sit there and recorded her statement in relation to the complaint lodged against her. At that time, initially, at about 4:30 the police mentioned regarding fraud of Rs.2.5 lakhs having been committed, at about 8:30 at night they mentioned fraud of Rs.16 lakhs and after a little while, Sub Inspector Pathan stated that there was a fraud of Rs.18 lakhs. During the course of the day, Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas Patel, Dr. Haripriya, Vivek Mishra and Advocate Vadodariya etc. made her sit in the room till 2 O'clock at night and were pressurizing her to return the funds in respect of which fraud was committed with Anandiben and were mentally harassing her. In the meanwhile, Sunil Pillai who was serving at Centurion Bank of Punjab, came at about 12 O'clock at night with a stamp paper to the police station and, Pratik Tandon, Vivek Mishra and Advocate Vadodariya and others had pressurized her and threatened her that she should sign on the stamp paper as per their say, otherwise she would be arrested. In this manner, she was pressurized and Police Inspector Shri Patel had said to one policeman present there that make this lady understand and if she does not, put the time of arrest as 2 O'clock and go and take her to Gaekwad Haveli Police Station. Hence, she was afraid and succumbing to the pressure of Pratik Tandon, Vivek Mishra and others who were present there on account of the threats given by them, she had signed on the stamp paper and writing. A perusal of the stamp paper showed that Sunil Pillai had purchased the same at night in her name and that actually she had not purchased any stamp paper, nor had she asked him to purchase it. Also at the relevant time, Pratik Tandon, Vivek Mishra, Dr. Tejas, Advocate Vadodariya etc. had also pressurized her into signing another blank paper and had also got her to sign a document permitting transfer of the balance amount of Rs.4,70,000/- lying in her account to Anandiben Amin's account and that out of the balance lying in her account Rs.4,50,000/- was of her staff loan. When she informed Pratik Tandon about the same, he had told her that they would take the permission of the office. She has specifically stated to ensure that she does not withdraw the amount from her bank account, a complaint had been lodged against her at the said police station, and that ten days prior thereto, her account had been frozen and hence, their intention right from the beginning was clear. It is further alleged that the account had been frozen without her knowledge, and that at the relevant time she was on leave and that Pratik Tandon and others had forcibly got documents executed on stamp paper as well as obtained her signatures on blank paper and that upon asking for xerox copies of the same from Pratik Tandon, she was told that they would furnish the same, however, the same were not yet furnished. Thereafter, on 3.9.2007, Rs.4,70,000/- which was lying in her account, was transferred by way of a pay order to Anandiben's account, however, for the purpose of preparing the pay order, she had not given any written application and that no prescribed form as required for the purpose of preparing pay order had been filled in, nor any cheque had been issued. Thereafter on 2.9.2008, she received a phone call from PSI Shri Pathan who told her that she, Anandiben and Pratik Tandon were required to go to meet DSP Chudasama. Pursuant thereto, she had gone to the office of the DSP at 12:30 hours and downstairs, Pratik Tandon had told her that she was not supposed to say anything and whatever was to be spoken, he would say so and all three of them went to the office of Chudasama. At that time, Pratik Tandon had said that they had all settled the matter between them whereupon, Chudasama had told her that she should settle the matter and that she should not talk about running away from the case. He had told that the police was not far from her and thereafter, Pratik Tandon, Dr. Haripriya and Dr. Tejas etc. were time and again telephoning her, telling her that she had executed a document for transferring her house and asking her as to when she would do so and were threatening her, and that Pratik Tandon through the members of his staff was administering threats and was time and again getting her threatened to conclude the matter soon. Accordingly, she has lodged the first information report alleging commission of the offences under sections 341 , 385 , 380 , 389 , 506 and 509 IPC. Mr. P. M. Thakkar, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the applicants invited attention to the sections of the Indian Penal Code which have been invoked in the first information report, to submit that on the allegations made in the first information report, none of the offences alleged can be stated to have been made out. The attention of the court was drawn to the fact that the incident in question is alleged to have taken place on 1.9.2007, whereas the first information report has been lodged on 20.9.2008, that is, after a period of more than one year from the date of occurrence of the said incident. It was submitted that the allegations made in the first information report are to the effect that while the first informant was at the police station, the applicants herein had coerced her into signing two documents. Inviting attention to the documents in question, it was pointed out that in both the documents, the first informant has made an endorsement to the effect that the same have been signed by her of her of own free will and without being subjected to any pressure, and that the first informant's brother had also made endorsements to the very same effect and put his signature on both the documents. Further, the said documents have been counter signed by Dr. Haripriya as well as the police inspector. It was submitted that the applicants herein are not signatories to the said documents and that despite the fact that it has been alleged that the documents had been signed by the first informant under threat of being arrested, the police inspector who had administered such threats has not been arraigned as an accused. Inviting attention to the representation dated 5.9.2007 made by the first informant to the Director General of Police, Mr. Thakkar submitted that the applicant is a literate person who is well conscious of her rights and that at the first instance, she has approached the Director General of Police in connection with her grievances and has succeeded in getting the investigation in respect of the first information report lodged against her transferred to the CID Crime Branch. Under the circumstances, the first informant could very well have lodged the first information report in question at the relevant time. It was emphasized that reason behind the first informant not lodging the first information report at the relevant time is obvious, viz., that the documents in question had been willingly executed by her. However subsequently, in view of the fact that in the investigation made pursuant to the first information report lodged against her, the applicants herein had persisted in prosecuting the matter even after the investigating agency filed summary report, as a counter blast, the present first information report has been lodged. It was pointed out that initially, the police has lodged summary report which has not been accepted by the learned Magistrate, who had directed further investigation in the matter. After further investigation, again a summary report came to be submitted pursuant to which, the applicants herein had filed objections on 13.7.2009. It was contended that it is only with a view to pressurize the applicants herein not to pursue the matter against the first informant, that the present first information report has been lodged. It was urged that a complaint had been received from a customer of the Bank against the first informant, pursuant to which an inquiry had been made by the F. C. Unit of the bank and that it was only after the inquiry report was received that a first information report had been lodged against the respondent No.2 herein. It was submitted that the applicants herein are officers of the bank and have got no axe to grind against the first informant. According to the learned counsel, on the allegations made in the first information report, it is apparent that the offences as alleged cannot be stated to have been made out. It was submitted that insofar as invocation of section 341 IPC which pertains to wrongful restraint is concerned, as is evident from the allegations made in the first information report, the first informant had been brought to the police station by the police officers and hence, under no circumstances, could the applicants who are officers of the bank be stated to have wrongly restrained her. As regards the offence under section 386 IPC, it was submitted that the same can be invoked where a person is put in fear of death or grievous hurt, whereas, in the facts of the present case, there is no averment to that effect in the first information report. Insofar as the offences under sections 506 and 509 IPC are concerned, it was submitted that the basic allegations for constituting the said offences are absent in the first information report. It was emphatically argued that the allegation in the first information report to the effect that the first informant was subjected to criminal intimidation by the applicants herein in the police station is a ground on which the first information report should be quashed. It was submitted that the first information report is merely a counter-blast to the protest petition filed by the applicants herein. It was urged that at present, the "C" summary report is pending before the learned Magistrate and that in the light of the first information report lodged against the applicants, they are not in a position to give any statement or evidence, freely. It was pointed out that even the learned advocate who was representing the Bank has refused to appear on behalf of the bank as he has also been arraigned as an accused. It was urged that this is an indirect way of pressurizing the applicants from not doing their duty. It was next submitted that in the first information report, no reasons have been given as regards the delay caused in filing the first information report. Reference was made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Kishan Singh v. Gurpal Singh , (2010) 8 SCC 755, to submit that the first informant had every opportunity to lodge the first information report at the relevant time, however, she had failed to do so and that at a belated stage, merely as a counter blast to the applicants herein pursuing the criminal proceedings against the first informant, the present first information report has been lodged. It was submitted that the first information report has been filed with a view to wreak vengeance so as to dissuade them from prosecuting the first information report lodged against the respondent No.2 and as such is covered by illustration (7) of the category of cases enumerated by the Supreme Court wherein power under section 482 of the Code could be exercised in its decision in the case of State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal , 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, viz. where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive of wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge. It was, accordingly, urged that the first information report is an abuse of the process of law and as such, deserves to be quashed and set aside. Mr. Virat Popat, learned advocate appearing for the applicants in Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.13016 of 2008 submitted that the only accusation against the said applicants is that the first informant was confined in the police station and was being pressurized to return the money. It was submitted that the very fact that no police officer has been arraigned as an accused, makes the allegation itself improbable. It was urged that Anandiben, the applicant No.1 herein is herself a victim in the first information report lodged against the respondent No.2-first informant. It was contended that none of the offences as alleged in the first information report can be stated to have been made out on the allegations made therein, and that the complainant has an axe to grind against the applicants and other accused persons and it is only with a view to wreak vengeance that a criminal colour has been given to the matter after vigorous efforts on the part of the officers of the bank to arrive at the truth. Inviting attention to the documents on which the signatures are allegedly forcibly obtained by the accused, it was submitted that the same have been executed by the first informant as per her free will, however, now she has backtracked and after a year from the date of the alleged incident, has lodged the present first information report stating that she had not given her consent. It was submitted that there is contemporaneous record signed by the first informant, which show that no force was utilized and the same are countersigned by her brother and the police officer who is not an accused. It was submitted that the first information report is merely a ruse created with a view to falsely implicate the applicants and prevent them from pursuing the matter against the first informant. Referring to the provisions of section 383 IPC, which defines "extortion", it was submitted that the said provision contemplates a person being intentionally put in fear of any injury and thereby dishonestly inducing the person so put in fear to deliver to any person any property or valuable security, or anything signed or sealed which may be converted into a valuable security. Thus, section 383 IPC envisages a person being dishonestly induced. Referring to section 24 IPC, which defines "dishonestly", it was submitted that the same contemplates doing anything with the intention of causing wrongful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person. Section 383 IPC is, therefore, required to be read along with section 24 IPC by importing the meaning of the word "dishonestly" as defined under section 24 in the said provision. It was submitted that in the facts of the present case, money lying in the account of the first informant belong to the bank as the loan was sanctioned to her and that as she had been removed from the service, she had no opportunity to repay the loan. Even if it was assumed that some force was exerted for the purpose of getting the above referred two documents executed, section 383 IPC will not come into play as the first informant has not suffered any wrongful loss inasmuch as, the loan has merely been adjusted. The next contention advanced by the learned advocate was that, the delay in lodging the first information report is fatal inasmuch as, if the claim of the first informant was genuine, nothing stopped her from going to the police at the relevant time. It was submitted that the first informant is well educated and is well aware of the legal procedures and above all in connection with the first information report lodged against her, she has approached the Director General of Police and has successfully got the investigation transferred to another agency; she has also approached the Human Rights Commission and as such there is no valid reason for her not lodging the first information report at the relevant time. Under the circumstances, it is apparent that the first information report is mala fide, vexatious and has been filed merely to wreak vengeance, calling for exercise of powers under section 482 of the Code. Vehemently opposing the application, Mr. I. H. Syed, learned advocate for the respondent No.2-first informant submitted that the first informant was detained at the police station till 2 O'clock at night and her signatures were obtained on the authority letter as well as another document stating that her willingness to transfer her house. It was pointed out that in connection with the first information report filed against her, the first informant had made a representation to the Director General of Police, based on which the investigation came to be transferred to the State CID Crime, and at the conclusion of the investigation a closure report came to be submitted, which was not accepted by the learned Magistrate and further investigation came to be directed. However, after further investigation was done, once again a closure report came to be submitted and at this stage the matter is pending before the learned Magistrate. It was submitted that both the offences namely, the first information report lodged by the first informant as well as the first information report lodged by the bank against the first informant are distinct offences and cannot be connected with each other. Referring to the investigation report submitted by the F. C. Unit of the bank, it was pointed out that the same mentioned the names of several persons who were allegedly involved in the offence, to submit that despite the aforesaid fact, the first information report came to be lodged against the respondent No.2 alone. It was submitted that had the said report been the basis for filing the first information report, the names of the other persons would also have been reflected therein as accused. 5.1 Insofar as the offences alleged to have been committed by the accused persons are concerned, it was submitted that the ingredients thereof are clearly spelt out in the first information report. Referring to section 389 IPC, it was submitted that the moment fear comes, the offence comes into existence. It was submitted that the allegation of false accusation is very much there in the present case, under the circumstances, the provisions of section 389 IPC are clearly applicable. It was further submitted that the facts of the present case are gross, inasmuch as, the first informant was taken to the police station without issuing any summons, without following the provisions of the Code and was kept at the police station and was forced to sign the documents in question. It was contended that the whole intention of the accused was to pick her up and to coerce her into making the payment as there was no evidence against the first informant. It was pointed out that insofar as the first information report filed against the second respondent is concerned, all the transactions were thoroughly investigated by the Economic Offences Wing of the State CID Crime, who at the conclusion of the investigation, has submitted a summary report. The attention of the court was invited to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal , (supra) wherein it had been held that even if the allegations in the first information report do suffer from misty vagueness and lack of particulars, these are all matters which would be examined during the course of investigation and thereafter by the court on the materials collected and placed before it by the investigating agency. It is settled legal position that the power of quashing a criminal proceeding should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too, in the rarest of rare cases and that the court will not be justified in embarking upon an inquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint. It was held that the extraordinary or inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or caprice. Reliance was also placed upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Orissa v. Saroj Kumar Sahoo , (2005) 13 SCC 540, for the proposition that the powers possessed by the High Court under section 482 CrPC are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material. At the stage when the investigation is not complete, it is not permissible for the High Court to look into materials, the acceptability of which is essentially a matter for trial. Inviting attention to the airlines ticket annexed with the petition, the learned counsel pointed out that the said document is in the nature of the defence of concerned applicant and is in the nature of an alibi and requires investigation. At this stage, it is not permissible for the court to look into the applicants' defence. Reliance was also placed upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of T. Vengama Naidu v. T. Dora Swamy Naidu , (2007) 12 SCC 93, wherein the court held that an FIR and the consequent investigation cannot be quashed unless there is no offence spelt out from the same. The law in this respect is settled that the said FIR had to be taken on its face value and then it is to be examined as to whether it spells out the offences complained of. There is no question of considering the merits of the allegations contained in FIR at this stage or testing the veracity of allegations. In the facts of the said case it was observed that the investigation was in progress and the police had not reported back to the Magistrate the result of their investigation, under the circumstances, the FIR could have been quashed only and only if there appeared to be no offence spelt out therein. Adverting to the facts of the present case, the learned counsel submitted that the first information report clearly spells out the offences alleged and as such, at this stage, there is no warrant for intervention in exercise of powers under section 482 of the Code. 5.2 Reliance was also placed upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of A. P. v. Golconda Linga Swamy , (2004) 6 SCC 522, for the proposition that the complaint/FIR has to be read as a whole. If it appears that on consideration of the allegations in the light of the statement made on oath of the complainant or disclosed in the FIR that the ingredients of the offence or offences are disclosed and there is no material to show that the complaint/FIR is malafide, frivolous or vexatious, in that event, there would be no justification for interference by the High Court. When an information is lodged at the police station and an offence is registered, then the mala fides of the informant would be of secondary importance. It is the material collected during the investigation and evidence led in court which decides the fate of the accused person. It was submitted that in the facts of the present case, all the offences are disclosed which require to be investigated and that at this stage, the allegations of mala fides of the first informant are of no consequence and as such, the application deserves to be dismissed. In rejoinder, Mr. P. M. Thakkar, learned counsel for the applicants submitted that the applicants are employees of a bank. A customer filed a complaint against the second respondent about misappropriation pursuant to which, inquiry was carried out and a report came to be submitted leading to lodging of a first information report against the second respondent. Subsequently after a year of the occurrence of the alleged incident, the second respondent filed a first information report, but did not arraign the police as accused. Though a serious offence has been disclosed, she was not arrested and was permitted to leave. It was submitted that the second respondent executed documents which are not in dispute. Referring to the documents which have been allegedly executed under the threat of arrest, it was pointed out that the bank employees are not signatories to any of the documents. The said documents have been countersigned by the police inspector who is not an accused and that the documents indicate some sort of settlement between the customer and the second respondent. Inviting attention to the purshish dated 25.8.2008 filed on behalf of the bank in the proceedings pending before the learned Magistrate in connection with the first information report lodged against the second respondent, it was pointed out that the second respondent had been threatening to lodge a first information report against the applicants herein during the course of hearing of the "C" summary report and that it was only with a view to pressurize the bank and its officers to desist from pursuing the matter any further, that the first information report in question has been lodged. It was submitted that the applicants herein are not parties to the settlement or the documents executed at the police station and that the bank has taken all steps to ensure that proper investigation is carried out. Referring to the sequence of events in the present case, it was pointed out that though the incident in question is alleged to have taken place on 1.9.2007, the first information report came to be lodged only on 20.9.2009 and that in between, no event had occurred on account of which, the second respondent was required to lodge the first information report and that it was only on account of the fact that the applicant who are officers of the bank were pursuing the proceedings against the second respondent that the first information report in question came to be lodged. It was, accordingly, urged that it was only on account of persistence on the part of the bank employees that the complaint in question had been filed and that the court should lean in favour of the applicants as they are only doing their duty. It was submitted that the conduct of the first informant is also required to be taken into consideration, inasmuch as she has waited for a whole year and in the meanwhile, has not instituted any proceedings, whether civil or criminal. It was urged that the bank is only trying to get justice for its customers and hence, its officers are being prosecuted. If the claim of the second respondent was genuine, nothing had stopped her from going to the police at the relevant time. It was, accordingly, urged that the first information report in question being vexatious and malafide, deserves to be quashed and set aside. In the backdrop of the aforesaid facts and contentions, the question that arises for consideration is as to whether on the allegations made in the first information report, any offence as alleged can be stated to have been made out. The apex court in the case of State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (supra), which still holds the field, has given the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein the power under Article 226 or the inherent power under section 482 of the Code could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice: "(1) Where the allegations made in the First Information Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused; (2) Where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if any, accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code; (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the first information report or 'complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against the accused; (4) Where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code; (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused; (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party; (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal grudge." Thus, the first information report is to be read as a whole and it is required to be examined as to whether on the allegations made therein, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, whether prima facie any offence can be stated to be constituted against the accused. On behalf of the applicants, it has also been contended that the allegations made in the first information report are absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused and that the criminal proceeding is manifestly tainted with mala fides and is instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused. In State of Orissa v. Saroj Kumar Sahoo (supra), the Supreme Court has held thus: "11. As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. The High Court being the highest court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any stage. (See: Janata Dal v. H. S. Chowdhary , [1992] 4 SCC 305, and Raghubir Saran (Dr.) v. State of Bihar, AIR (1964) SC 1). It would not be proper for the High Court to analyze the case of the complainant in the light of all probabilities in order to determine whether a conviction would be sustainable and on such premises arrive at a conclusion that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would be erroneous to assess the material before it and conclude that the complaint cannot be proceeded with. When an information is lodged at the police station and an offence is registered, then the mala fides of the informant would be of secondary importance. It is the material collected during the investigation and evidence led in court which decides the fate of the accused person. The allegations of mala fides against the informant are of no consequence and cannot by themselves be the basis for quashing the proceedings. (See: Dhanalakshmi v. R. Prasanna Kumar, [1990] Supp SCC 686, State of Bihar v. P. P. Sharma, AIR (1996) SC 309, Rupan Deol Bajaj v. Kanwar Pal Singh Gill, [1995] 6 SCC 194, State of Kerala v. O.C. Kuttan, AIR (1999) SC 1044, State of U.P. v. O.P. Sharma, [1996] 7 SCC 705, Rashmi Kumar v. Mahesh Kumar Bhada, [1997] 2 SCC 397, Satvinder Kaur v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi, AIR (1996) SC 2983 and Rajesh Bajaj v. State NCT of Delhil, [1999] 3 SCC 259). 14. It is to be noted that the investigation was not complete and at that stage it was impermissible for the High Court to look into materials, the acceptability of which is essentially a matter for trial. While exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C., it is not permissible for the Court to act as if it was a trial Court. Even when charge is framed at that stage, the Court has to only prima facie be satisfied about existence of sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. For that limited purpose, the Court can evaluate material and documents on records but it cannot appreciate evidence. The Court is not required to appreciate evidence to conclude whether the materials produced are sufficient or not for convicting the accused. In Chand Dhawan (Smt.) v. Jawahar Lal and Ors. , [1992] 3 SCC 317, it was observed that when the materials relied upon by a party are required to be proved, no inference can be drawn on the basis of those materials to conclude the complaint to be unacceptable. The Court should not act on annexures to the petitions under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C., which cannot be termed as evidence without being tested and proved." In T. Vengama Naidu v. T. Dora Swamy Naidu (supra), the Supreme Court held thus : "7. It cannot be disputed that a private complaint was filed before the learned Magistrate who had made over the said complaint for investigation under section 156(3) CrPC. That order of the Magistrate has not been challenged. On the basis of that order the police registered a crime probably treating the complaint as FIR. It is settled law that an FIR and the consequent investigation cannot be quashed unless there is no offence spelt out from the same. The law in this respect is settled that the said FIR has to be taken on its face value and then it is to be examined as to whether it spells out the offences complained of. There was no question of considering the merits of the allegations contained in FIR at that stage or testing the veracity of allegations. In this case, admittedly, the investigation was in progress. The police had also not reported back to the Magistrate the result of their investigation. Under such circumstances, FIR could have been quashed only and only if there appeared to be no offence spelt out therein." Examining the facts of the present case in the light of the aforesaid judicial pronouncements, a perusal of the allegations made in the first information report shows that the principal allegation is that the second respondent was detained at the police station and was forced to sign certain documents under the threat of arrest. In the first information report, the second respondent has alleged that she was picked up from her residence by the applicant No.1 and two policemen and a policewoman and was taken to the police station. Upon reaching the police station, Mayuresh and Rajat Mishra handed over the termination letter was to her, which she had refused to accept. At the police station, the applicants, viz. Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas, Dr. Haripriya, Vivek Mishra and Advocate Vadodariya were shouting loudly and putting questions after questions to her, but none of them were listening to her and that, she was taken to the Police Inspector Shri B. R. Patel and Shri Patel who had lost his temper and said that he was not going to listen to her, and had further said that she should be taken her away and put in the lock up. That thereafter, the police took her to the room next to the computer room and made her sit there and recorded her statement in the complaint lodged against her. It is further stated that the police initially mentioned a fraud of Rs.2.5 lakhs having been committed, which was increased to Rs.4 lakhs at 4:00 O'clock; at about 08:30 at night, the amount in respect of which the fraud was alleged to have been committed had become Rs.16 lakhs and after a little while, the said amount was enhanced to Rs.18 lakhs. During the course of the day, Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas Patel, Dr. Haripriya, Vivek Mishra and Advocate Vadodariya had detained her in a room till 2 O'clock at night and were pressurizing her to return the funds in respect of which fraud was committed with Anandiben and were mentally harassing her. That, in the meanwhile, at about 12 O'clock, Sunil Pillai who was serving at Centurion Bank of Punjab, came with a stamp paper to the police station and Pratik Tandon, Vivek Mishra and Advocate Vadodariya and others had pressurized her and threatened her that unless she executed the documents as told by them, she would be placed under arrest in the connection with the said first information report. Further, the Police Inspector, Shri Patel had told a policeman that make her understand, failing which he should put the time of arrest as 2 O'clock and take her to Gaekwad Haveli Police Station, because of which she was scared and under pressure from the persons present there, including Pratik Tandon and Vivek Mishra, she had signed the documents in question. That the stamp paper indicated that the same had been purchased in her name, whereas, she had not asked anybody to purchase the same. It is alleged that her signatures were also taken on an authority letter permitting the bank to withdraw Rs.4.70 lakhs from her account, as well as on a blank paper. It is further alleged that on the next date, i.e. on 2nd September, she was asked to remain present at the office of DCP Chudasama along with Pratik Tandon and Anandiben, where the concerned police officer told her that she should settle the matter and not try to run away from the case and that the police was not far from her. That thereafter, Pratik Tandon, Dr. Haripriya, Dr. Tejas were off and on calling her and asking her as to when she would transfer the house in terms of the stamp paper executed by her. It may be noted that the incident in question is alleged to have taken place on 1st September, 2007, whereas the first information report has been lodged on 20th September, 2009. In the first information report, no reason has been assigned as to why there is delay of over a period of one year in lodging the first information report. However, it may be noticed that on 5th September, 2007, that is few days after the occurrence of the alleged incident, the second respondent had made a representation to the Director General of Police seeking handing over of the investigation to some independent officer or agency and had also narrated the facts regarding the incident in question in the said representation. At this juncture, it may also be pertinent to refer to the facts stated in the said representation. In the said representation, it has been stated by the first informant that she was taken for interrogation to the Ghatlodia police station by three policemen who had come to her residence along with Pratik Tandon and at the police station, Mr. Mayuresh and Mr. Rajat were present and had asked her to sign and receive the termination letter which she had denied to do. From 10.00 a.m. till midnight, she was detained and interrogated with many questions by P. I. Mr. Patel without listening to her he was screaming and threatening her and was asking to put her behind the bars if she did not do as per their wish. In the evening, she was told that there was a fraud of Rs.16 lakhs, whereas after two hours, they said there was fraud of Rs.18 lakhs. When she asked for the details of the same, they all denied. Around 12.00 a.m., she was forced by Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas Nakrani, Dr. Haripriya Amin and advocate Mr. Vadodaria to write and sign on a stamp paper in the police station saying that she will hand over the documents of her residence to them within three days. Also Mr. Pratik and Mr. Vivek, Branch Manager of Parimal Branch had forced her to write an authority letter of transferring Rs.4,70,000/- to Smt. Anandiben Amin's account. She was asked to go home around 12:45 a.m. at night and in the next morning, she got a call from Ghatlodia Police Station that she has to meet DGP Shri Chudasama along with Mrs. Anandiben Amin and Mr. Pratik Tandon. That DGP Shri Chudasama directed to do the settlement between them as soon as possible and since then, she was getting calls to transfer her house in the name of Mrs. Anandiben Amin or else to pay cash of Rs.13 lakhs or she will be put behind the bars. That they already transferred the amount of Rs.4,70,000/- in Smt. Anandiben Amin's account and were pressurizing her to pay the amount by transferring the house or else police will arrest her. It is an admitted position that pursuant to the above representation, the DGP had transferred the investigation in relation to the first information report lodged against the second respondent by the bank to the CID Crime Branch. It is settled legal position that at the stage of considering a petition under section 482 of the Code for quashing a complaint the defence of the accused cannot be looked into, it is equally well settled that admitted documents or official documents can be looked into. In the present case the representation made by the second respondent to the DGP is an admitted document. On a conjoint reading of the allegations made in the first information report and the representation made to the DGP at the earliest point of time, it is apparent that there are basic inconsistencies in the version mentioned in the first information report and that stated in the representation. Whereas in the representation, the first informant has stated that she was being interrogated by Mr. P. I. Patel who was not listening to her and that at 12:00 a.m., she was forced by Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas Nakrani, Dr. Haripriya Amin and advocate Mr. Vadodaria to write and sign on stamp paper in the Police Station saying that she would hand over her residence document to them within three days; whereas in the first information report she has changed her version and alleged that it was the applicants, viz., Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas, Dr. Haripriya, Anandiben, Vivek Mishra and advocate Vadodariya were shouting at her and asking her questions and were not listening to her and had taken her to the Police Inspector, Shri B.R. Patel who had shouted at her and told her that if she did not listen, she would be put to the lock up. In the representation made before the DGP, there is not even a whisper as regards Smt. Anandiben's presence at the police station, whereas in the first information report, Anandiben is also brought into picture and it is alleged that she along with other co-accused had kept the first informant confined in a room till 2 O'clock at night. In the first information report it has been alleged that Pratik Tandon, Dr. Tejas, Dr. Haripriya, Anandiben, Vivek Mishra and advocate Vadodariya had made here sit in the Police Station till 2:00 a.m. whereas in the representation she has stated that she was permitted to go home at about 12:45 a.m. at night. As regards the offences alleged in the first information report in question, the same are punishable under sections 341 , 385 , 386 , 389 , 506(2) , 509 and 114 of the IPC. Section 341 IPC makes provision for wrongful restraint. "Wrongful restraint" is defined under section 339 IPC, which provides that whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from proceeding to any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to restrain that person. In the facts of the present case, admittedly, as is evident from the allegations made in the first information report, the first informant was brought to the police station by the police. Under the circumstances, it is not possible to believe that in the police station, it was the applicants herein who had wrongfully restrained her. The provisions of said section would, therefore, not be attracted in the facts of the present case. Section 386 IPC deals with extortion by putting a person in fear of death or grievous hurt and lays down that whoever commits extortion by putting any person in fear of death or of grievous hurt to that person or to any other, shall be punished as provided under the said section. On a plain reading of the allegations made in the first information report, there is no allegation to the effect that the first informant was put in fear of death or grievous hurt to herself or to any other person so as to attract the provisions of section 386 IPC. Section 389 IPC bears the heading "Putting person in fear of accusation of offence, in order to commit extortion" and lays down that whoever, in order to committing of extortion, puts or attempts to put any person in fear of an accusation, against that person or any other, of having committed, or attempted to commit an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and, if the offence is punishable under section 377 of the Code, may be punished with imprisonment for life. Thus, the main ingredient of the said section is that the person should be put in fear of accusation of having committed or attempted to commit an offence punishable with death or life imprisonment. In the present case, it has been contended on behalf of the second respondent that the allegation of false accusation is very much there in the present case. It may be noted that in the present case, the first information report in question had already been lodged pursuant to which, the second respondent had been taken to the police station, under the circumstances, the accusation was already in existence at the time when the offence is alleged to have taken place. There was, therefore, no question of putting the first informant in the fear of accusation inasmuch as, the same was already in existence prior to the commission of the alleged offence. The threat, if any, that is alleged to have been administered to the first informant is to sign the documents in question failing which she would be put under arrest or sent to the lock up. Insofar as the said threat is concerned, it does not fall within the ambit of section 389 IPC, moreover, threat or arrest or sending to lock up had been given by the police officer who has not been arraigned as an accused. Under the circumstances, the provisions of section 389 IPC are clearly not attracted. Insofar as the provisions of section 506(2) and 509 IPC are concerned, the basic averments or allegations for attracting the said sections are totally missing in the first information report. In the entire first information report, there is not even a whisper to the effect that any of the accused had uttered any word or made any sound or gesture intending to insult the modesty of the first informant or that they had intruded upon her privacy. The only section which could be said to be attracted is section 385 IPC, that is, putting a person in fear of any injury, that is, fear of being arrested or put in the lock up. On a reading of the first information report, it is apparent that such threat of arresting the first informant or putting her in the lock up had been administered by the concerned police inspector who has not been arraigned as accused. Section 385 IPC could, therefore, have been invoked against the applicants herein by invoking section 114 IPC provided the police inspector had been arraigned as accused. However, for reasons best known to the first informant, the concerned police officer has not been arraigned as accused in the absence of which no offence under section 385 IPC can be stated to have been made out against the applicants herein. On behalf of the applicants, it has been contended that in case where there is a delay in lodging a first information report, the court has to look for a plausible explanation for such delay. In the absence of such an explanation, the delay may be fatal. The reason for quashing such proceedings may not be merely that the allegations were an after-thought or had given a coloured version of the events, in such cases, the court should carefully examine the facts before it for the reason that a frustrated litigant who failed to succeed before the civil court may initiate criminal proceedings just to harass the other side with mala fide intention or the ulterior motive of wreaking vengeance on the other party. Chagrined and frustrated litigants should not be permitted to give vent to their frustrations by cheaply invoking the jurisdiction of the criminal court. The court proceedings ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a weapon of harassment and persecution. In such a case, where an FIR is lodged clearly with a view to spite the other party because of a private and personal grudge and to enmesh the other party in long and arduous criminal proceedings, the court may take a view that it amounts to an abuse of the process of law in the facts and circumstances of the case. Adverting to the facts of the present case, though the incident is alleged to have taken place on 1.9.2007, the first information report has been lodged after a period of more than one year. There is no plausible explanation coming forth either in the first information report or in the affidavit filed by the second respondent in the present proceedings for the delay caused in lodging the first information report. The facts emerging from the record indicate that the first informant is well educated and is a person who is well conscious of her rights. In fact, in respect of the first information report lodged against her, the first informant had made a representation to the Director General of Police and had successfully got the investigation transferred to another agency which is not an ordinary achievement. Under the circumstances, one fails to comprehend as to why a person like the applicant was not in a position to lodge the first information report at the relevant point of time. It is not the case of the first informant either in the first information report or in the affidavit that at the relevant time, the police had refused to register her complaint, nor is it the case of the second respondent in the representation made to the DGP that the police had refused to record her complaint. Thus, between the date of the alleged incident and the date of lodging the first information report, the only event that has occurred, and which appears to have prompted the first informant to lodge the complaint in question is the protest petition filed by the bank against the summary report lodged against the first informant. The applicants, therefore, appear to be justified in contending that the first information report has been lodged with the mala fide intent of pressurizing the applicants to desist from raising objections against the summary report filed by the Investigating Officer in connection with the first information report lodged against the first informant. Another aspect of the matter is that the documents in question which the first informant is alleged to have been forced to execute are admitted documents. Copies of the said documents have been placed on record. A perusal of the said documents shows that one of the said documents has been signed by the first informant, Dr. Haripriya as well as the first informant's her brother Debasis Mitra, whereas another document has been signed by the first informant, her brother and the concerned police sub-inspector. Thus, insofar as the applicants in Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.12967 of 2008, that is, the officers of the bank are concerned, they are not signatories to the documents in question. In both the documents, the first informant has put an endorsement to the effect that the same have not been signed under pressure or threat. Though it is the case of the first informant that the said documents have been obtained under pressure, she has not taken any action in respect thereof for a period of one year, nor has she made any attempt to get the same cancelled, and it is only after a period of one year from the date of the alleged incident that the present first information report has been lodged making the allegations noted hereinabove. Under the circumstances, in the opinion of this court, the first information report lodged by the second respondent against the applicants herein is nothing but an abuse of the process of law and has been filed with the malicious intent to harass the applicants in order to pressurize them not to pursue the criminal proceedings lodged against her. As noted hereinabove, though it is asserted that the first informant was forced to sign the documents in question under threat of arrest and being sent to lock up, surprisingly the police officer with whom the applicants are alleged to have colluded, has not been arraigned as an accused. The criminal law has been set in motion by the first informant to harass the bank officers needlessly to wreak personal vengeance in order to bring them under pressure not to further prosecute the proceedings already initiated by them against the first informant on behalf of the bank. Besides, as already discussed hereinabove, none of the offences alleged in the first information report can be stated to have been attracted in the facts and circumstances of the case. In the circumstances, this is a fit case for exercise of powers under section 482 of the Code. For the foregoing reasons, the applications succeed and are, accordingly, allowed. The first information report registered vide Ghatlodiya Police Station I - C. R. No. 163/2008 is hereby quashed and set aside. Rule is made absolute, accordingly, in both the applications. It is clarified that none of the observations made in this judgment shall in any manner influence the proceeding in relation to the closure report submitted by the investigating agency in the first information report registered vide Ghatlodiya police station I - C. R. No. 166/2007 lodged against the second respondent. The said proceeding shall be decided on its own merits in accordance with law, without in any manner being influenced by any of the observations made in this judgment. [HARSHA DEVANI, J.] parmar*