Sanjeev Kapoor vs . State on 2 August, 2010 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State IN THE COURT OF SH. INDER JEET SINGH, ADDL. SESSION JUDGE­02, WEST DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI In the matter of - Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Shri Sanjeev Kapoor, S/o Shri O.P. Kapoor, R/o 14/2, 3rd Floor, East Patel Nagar, New Delhi. .....Petitioner Versus The State (NCT of Delhi). .....Respondent Date of Institution : 01.07.2010 Decision reserved on : 20.07.2010 Date of decision : 02.08.2010 Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 1 of 7 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State JUDGMENT 1.1 The petitioner Sanjeev Kapoor filed a complaint against his wife and two children, under section 211 / 500 / 34 IPC read with Section 467 / 468 / 471 IPC. The complainant married with Ms. Dolly Kapoor on 19.01.1983, the two children were born in the year 1988 and 1990. There are allegations of that, his wife was egocentric lady and petitioner/complainant was leading sexless life. The petitioner came in contact with a lady namely Ms. Nirupama Kumar, being friendship ripened into love and culminated into live­in­relationship and a female child was begotten in the year 1992. 1.2 There are other allegations in the complaint, in nutshell, the petitioner was to file a Suit for Perpetual Injunction for restraining his wife and children to make an entry in the properties, an interim order was passed in favour of the petitioner. The written statement was filed by his wife with a photocopy of police report dated 12.11.2002 (now Ex. CW­1/D), and another photocopy of manuscript letter (now Ex. CW­1/E­1). It came to the notice of petitioner's first time. The police report contains false allegations, the report was filed to prompt Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 2 of 7 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State the police to take action. Whereas, neither the allegations were in existence nor the petitioner is an author of letter (Ex. CW­1/E­1). The letter (Ex. CW­1/E­1) is forged and fabricated. The allegations in the police report was defamatory in nature and its publication amounts to innuendo. 1.3 The petitioner stepped into the witness box, he examined himself as CW­1 and also got examined Shri J.K. Bhatia as CW­2. 1.4 However, the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi dismissed the complaint, while concluding that neither the case under section 500 or 467 or 468 or 471 or 211 IPC is made out, to proceed further or to call the respondents in the Court as accused persons. The Magistrate also opined that from the contents of report to police or the manuscript letter, no offence of defamation or forgery of valuable security or forgery for the purposes of cheating or using forged document as genuine document, is made out. The Court also concluded that from the contents of letter, no offence is made out. The petitioner is aggrieved by the impugned order dated 24.05.2010 and the present revision petition assails it. 2.1 The petitioner is aggrieved by impugned order that the allegations in the police report is that he had married with a lady namely Ms. Nirupama Kumar, is a false allegation, despite she was Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 3 of 7 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State knowing that the petitioner was live­in­relationship with the said lady and he never married her. Secondly, a false allegation has been leveled with motivation to defame the petitioner. The petitioner's wife was knowing that the relation of the complainant with the said lady was for the last about 19 years and it was with her consent and, despite knowing all these facts, a false police report was lodged to prompt the police to take action against the petitioner. Since, other letter (Ex. CW­1/E­1) was not written by the petitioner, it amounts to forgery and the Trial Court failed to appreciate it because the letter can be termed a valuable security for the purposes of prosecution against the respondents in the complaint. The Trial Court was expected to appreciate material and evidence on record instead of anticipating the defence of respondents in the complaint, therefore, there is sufficient material to summon and tried the accused persons, by setting aside the impugned order dated 24.05.2010. 2.2 Ld. Counsel Shri Sumesh Gandhi, Advocate for petitioner has gone through the preliminary evidence as well as the statutory provisions of law, to highlight that at the initial stage, the Court was to scrutinize the material on record to form a prima facie view to proceed further in the matter. The police report (Ex. CW­1/D) clearly elucidate that the police report was filed to prompt the police to take action, as if, about 10 days back, two strangers was brought by Ms. Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 4 of 7 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State Nirupama Kumar and undue pressure or coercion was pressed, as if, the respondent Ms. Dolly Kapoor was feeling threat to her life or in the year 1991, there were some kind of meetings or family settlement. Similarly, there are also allegations that the petitioner married illegally with Ms. Nirupama Kumar, whereas, the petitioner never married her. The other letter (Ex. CW­1/E­1) make assertions like "..... we should live a happy married life, as advised by all our elders, it is resolved that I shall ensure the happiness of my wife Smt. Dolly Kapur and she shall reside with me after and before. I shall take care of her daily requirements .... peace of respected married life shall be maintained ....". Whereas, the petitioner has never written this letter, it is forged and manipulated. Ld. Counsel for petitioner also relies upon Province of Bihar vs. Surender Prasad AIR (38) 1951 Patna 86 that making of a document does not necessarily means signing or otherwise executing it, it only means creating or bringing into existence, for the purposes of making of a false document. Ld. Counsel also clarifies that Section 195 Cr.P.C does not apply as bar to the filing of complaint, since Ms. Dolly Kapoor filed a police report and it was also published, while filing it with the written statement. Thus, it is within prerogative of the petitioner to file a complaint independently. In Kanwal Lal vs. State of Punjab AIR 1963 SC 1317, the accused moved an application to District Panchayat Officer with an allegation Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 5 of 7 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State that the woman was of loose character, who was having illicit connection with goondas, it was held grossly defamatory. In Kuldeep Singh vs. Sandeep Kaur 1977 (1) CC Cases 172, the written statement in the proceedings under section 125 Cr.P.C were containing defamatory portions, it was held that Section 500 / 34 IPC is made out. Hence, the impugned order is liable to be set aside. 2.3 Whereas, Shri B.S. Kain, Ld. Additional Public Prosecutor for State/Respondent requests that it appears from the contents of complaint, summoned from the Trial Court as well as from the contents of revision petition that there is matrimonial disharmony and the allegations pertain to inter­se, the spouses. The Court may pass an appropriate order. 3. The rival contentions are assessed in the light of material on record, statutory provisions of law and the Trial Court record has also been perused. On assessment, there is no infirmity, illegality or incorrectness found in the impugned order, to perverse it and also for the following additional reasons, the revision petition is dismissed ­ (a)there is no evidence that by virtue of filing of written statement in the Court, accompanying photocopy of letter dated 12.11.2009, it lowered the prestige of the petitioner or complainant in the eyes of others; (b)the contents of letter do not suggest defamation as defined under section 499 IPC. The petitioner perceives that despite he is not married with Ms. Nirupama Kumar but it was alleged so in the police report dated Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 6 of 7 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State 12.11.2009, whereas on the other side, he himself asserts that he has been in live­in­relationship with Ms. Nirupama Kumar and they were blessed with a child out of such relation; (c)in the police report, Ms. Dolly Kapoor had requested for necessary action under the law and Ninth Exception appended to Section 499 IPC is that when certain imputations are made in good faith for protection of one's interest or rights, it would not tantamount to defamation; otherwise the police report does not demonstrate, prima facie, any defamation; (d)the other manuscript letter (Ex. CW­1/E­1) stated to be forged and manipulated is concerned, the suit is still pending before the Competent Court of law and the defendant i.e. Ms. Dolly Kapoor is yet to establish the letter, therefore, it would be pre­mature to make any comment as to who is author of letter, in case the petitioner disputes/denies it; (e)from the reasons (a) to (d), above, it does not establish, prima facie, either the case of defamation or case of forgery or a case of forgery for the purpose of cheating or a case of false charge of offence in order to injure the petitioner; and (f)further, the impugned letter (Ex. CW­1/E­1) appears to be of year 1991, referred in police report dated 12.11.2009, it is still subjudice matter before the Competent Court of law of Civil Judge, Delhi. Hence, the revision petition is dismissed. The trial Court record be sent back along with the copy of this judgment. The criminal revision petition is consigned to Record Room. (Announced in the open (INDER JEET SINGH) Court on 02.08.2010) ADDL. SESSION JUDGE WEST DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS DELHI N Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 7 of 7 Sanjeev Kapoor vs. State SANJEEV KAPOOR vs. STATE 02.08.2010 Present : Proxy counsel for counsel for petitioner. Shri B.S. Kain, Ld. Additional Public Prosecutor for State/Respondent. Vide separate judgment, announced today, the revision petition is dismissed. The trial Court record be sent back along with the copy of this judgment. The criminal revision petition is consigned to Record Room. (INDER JEET SINGH) ADDL. SESSION JUDGE WEST DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS N DELHI Criminal Revision No. 17/2010 Page 8 of 7