Sri. D S Kalmath vs Dr.Shankare Gouda on 12 October, 2020 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA KALABURAGI BENCH DATED THIS THE 12TH DAY OF OCTOBER, 2020 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MRS.JUSTICE M.G. UMA CRIMINAL PETITION No.201338/2018 BETWEEN: Sri D S Kalmath S/o Sri Siddaiah Kalmath Aged about 67 Years Advocate & Tax Consultant R/o Sindhanur, Opp. Town Police Station Sindhanur, Dist. Raichur ... Petitioner (By Sri R. S. Lagali, Advocate for Sri Sanjeevkumar C. Patil, Advocate) AND: Dr. Shankara Gouda S/o Sri Basavana Gouda Aged about 60 Years, General Physician Working in the Hospital of Dr. Chidanand Goud Adarsh Colony, Sindhanur Raichur District - 584101 ... Respondent (By Sri Ishwaraj S. Chowdapur, Advocate) 2 This Criminal Petition is filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C, praying to set aside the order dated 24.09.2018 passed by the Principal District and Sessions Judge, Raichur in Crl.R.P.No.39/2015. Restore the order dated 24.03.2014 passed by the Principal Civil Judge and JMFC, Sindhanur in P.C. No.5/2009 and C.C.No.542/2014. This petition coming on for Admission this day, the Court made the following: ORDER The petitioner who is the complainant before the Trial Court has filed this petition seeking to set aside the order dated 24.09.2018 passed by the learned Principal District and Sessions Judge, Raichur (for short, 'the Revisional Court'), in Criminal Revision Petition No.39/2015, wherein, the order dated 24.03.2014 passed by the learned Principal JMFC, Sindhanoor (for short, 'Trial Court') in P.C. No.5/2009, taking cognizance of the offence punishable under Section 500 of Indian Penal Code (for short, ' IPC ') against the accused/respondent was set aside. 3 2. Parties are referred to their rank before the Trial Court. 3. Brief facts of the case are that, the complainant had filed O.S.No.83/2008 against the accused seeking the relief of declaration and injunction. The complainant filed an interlocutory application i.e., I.A.No.5 under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of Code of Civil Procedure (for short, ' CPC ') seeking temporary injunction against the accused. The accused filed objections in the form of an affidavit to the said application, wherein, certain imputations were made against the complainant which are said to be defamatory on the face of it. It is said that the imputations were made with ill-will and with an intention to defame the complainant. 4. It is stated that the complainant issued legal notice to the accused, drawing his attention to the defamatory statement made against the complainant and calling upon his explanation. The accused has replied to the said notice. Thereafter, the complainant filed the 4 private complaint under Section 200 of Code of Criminal Procedure (for short, ' Cr.P.C .') against the accused before the Trial Court for the offence punishable under Section 499 punishable under Section 500 of IPC in P.C.No.5/2009. The Trial Court took cognizance of the offence and registered the complaint in C.C. No.542/2014. Process was issued to the accused to appear before the trial Court vide its order dated 24.03.2014. 5. Aggrieved by the said order passed by the trial Court, the accused preferred the Crl.R.P.No.39/2015 before the Revisional Court and sought for setting aside the order passed by the trial Court taking cognizance and issuance of process for the above said offence. The Revisional Court after taking into consideration the rival contentions of the parties, proceeded to allow the petition vide its order dated 24.09.2018 and set aside the order dated 24.03.2014 passed by the Trial Court in P.C.No.5/2009. 5 6. Aggrieved by the said order passed by the Revisional Court, the complainant is before this Court seeking to set aside the order passed by the Revisional Court and to restore the order passed by the Trial Court taking cognizance of the offence against the accused. 7. Heard Sri R.S. Lagali, learned counsel for Sri Sanjeevkumar C. Patil, learned counsel for the complainant and Sri Ishwaraj S. Chowdapur, learned counsel for the accused. 8. Learned counsel for the complainant submitted that while filing counter to I.A.No.5, the accused filed his affidavit, wherein it is stated that the plaintiff who is the complainant is a "Court bird and is in the habit of filing the complaints, suits and other proceedings against the public at large for self motives and unlawful enrichment." Therefore, it is said that there is imputation on the character of the complainant which is defamatory per se. Taking into consideration this fact, the Trial Court had taken cognizance of the offence punishable under Section 6 500 of IPC, but the Revisional Court without properly appreciating the contention of the complainant proceeded to set aside the order passed by the Trial Court taking cognizance of the offence and consequently, quashed the complaint in P.C.No.5/2009. 9. Learned counsel submits that the approach of the Revisional Court in holding a mini trial to find out the defence for the accused in the criminal prosecution for the offence punishable under Section 500 of IPC was uncalled for and the Revisional Court exceeded its limits and acted beyond the scope of Section 397 of Cr.P.C. The Revisional Court could not have considered the defence that may be available to the accused in the criminal prosecution for the offence under Section 500 of IPC, at the stage of taking cognizance of the offence. Therefore, the learned counsel for the complainant seeks for setting aside the order passed by the Revisional Court and to restore the order of the Trial Court taking cognizance and issue of process against the accused in the interest of justice. 7 10. The learned counsel for the complainant has relied on the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Amit Kapoor vs. Ramesh Chander and another1 and State of Gujarat vs Afroz Mohammed Hasanfatta2 in support of his contention that the Revisional Court has exceeded its limits in interfering with the order passed by the Trial Court. 11. Per contra, the learned counsel for the accused supporting the impugned order passed by the Revisional Court submitted that the Revisional Court has considered the contentions of the parties in the right perspective and formed an opinion that there was no imputation which attracts Sections 499 and 500 of IPC. It has also held that there was no intention to harm the reputation of the complainant and that the defence taken is rather a true fact and therefore, the accused is not liable for prosecution. Learned counsel submits that the accused is protected under 5th and 9th exceptions to Section 499 of IPC. Therefore, he would submit that there are no 1 (2012) 9 SCC 460 2 AIR 2019 SC 2499 8 justifiable grounds to interfere with the impugned order passed by the Revisional Court and prays for dismissal of the petition. 12. Perused the materials on record in the light of the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties. 13. The learned counsel for the complainant produced I.A.No.5 filed by the complainant in O.S.No.83/2008 on the file of the learned Principal Civil Judge (Jr.Dn.) at Sindhanur under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of CPC seeking temporary injunction against the accused restraining him and his men from establishing hospital, nursing home with resident patients/ inpatients, during the pendency of the suit. The complainant filed his affidavit in support of the said application alleging that even though he had filed the suit along with interim applications, the accused being defendant No.1 in the suit filed caveat and has dragged on the matter. He further stated that the accused had filed 9 caveat only with an intention to bring up the illegal construction without permission from CMC Authorities, for the purpose of running the hospital and the nursing home, thereby, cause health hazards and nuisance to the complainant and his family members. The accused has filed his counter to I.A.No.5 along with his affidavit stating that the complainant is 'a Court bird and is in the habit of filing complaint, suits and other proceedings against public at large, for his self motives and unlawful enrichment'. 14. According to the complainant, the above allegation made in the objections statement by the accused amounts to defamation. Therefore, he filed private complaint under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. before the trial Court in P.C.No.5/2009 for the offence under Section 499 punishable under Section 500 of IPC. 15. The trial Court vide its order dated 24.03.2014 took cognizance of the offence against the accused with an observation that the complainant is an advocate by profession and the stand taken by the accused is with an 10 intention to harm his reputation and therefore, would amount to an offence punishable under Section 500 of IPC. 16. Aggrieved by the order of taking cognizance of the offence, the accused preferred Criminal Revision Petition No.39/2015 before the Revisional Court. The Revisional Court considered the contentions of the parties and held that in view of 5th and 9th exceptions appended to Section 499 of IPC, the defence taken by the accused would not amount to defamation. It also observed that the Trial Court mechanically proceeded to take cognizance of the offence, without application of mind and therefore, the revision petition was allowed and the impugned order dated 24.03.2014 passed by the Trial Court taking cognizance and issuance of process to the accused was set aside. Aggrieved by the said order passed in the revision petition, the present petition came to be filed. 17. Admittedly, the complainant filed the suit in O.S.No.83/2008 against the accused seeking permanent injunction restraining the accused from using the 11 residential portion of the building for hospital purpose. It is also admitted that I.A.No.5 was filed Under order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of CPC seeking temporary injunction against the accused. The accused contested the matter and filed objections to I.A.No.5. Inter alia, the accused pleaded that the 'complainant is a Court bird and is in the habit of filing the complaints, suits and other proceedings against the public at large for self motive and unlawful enrichment'. On the basis of these admitted facts, it is the contention of the complainant that the said pleading in the objection statement amounts to defamation punishable under Section 500 of IPC. 18. Under Section 499 of IPC, the defamation is defined as under: "499. Defamation- Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation 12 will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person." 19. There are 10 exceptions to Section 499 of IPC. 5th and 9th exceptions read as under:- "Fifth Exception--Merits of case decided in Court of conduct of witnesses and others concerned.-- It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case, civic or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Ninth Exception--Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's interests.--It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests 13 of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good." 20. Plain reading of the definition of the word defamation under Section 499 of IPC along with 5th and 9th exceptions make it clear that there must be a publication of imputation concerning the persons intending to harm or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of such person. If there is an expression of opinion made in good faith, respecting the merits of the case and character of a person in a civil or criminal proceedings, it will not amount to defamation. Similarly, imputation made in good faith by a person for protection of his interest will also not be considered as defamation. 21. In the present case, there is no doubt true that the accused while filing the objection to I.A.No.5 made imputation on the complainant that he is a Court bird and he is in the habit of filing complaints, suits and other proceedings against the public at large for self motive and 14 unlawful enrichment. This being the pleading of the party to civil litigation, he is bound to prove the same, if he intends to succeed in the litigation. 22. The object and purpose of pleadings in any case is to enable the other parties to the litigation to know the case or the defence taken and to meet the same. Such pleading will enable the Courts to determine as to what is the real issue between the parties and to prevent deviation from the cause of action. The pleadings must state only the facts and the burden will be on the person who asserts the existence of the facts. 23. The interlocutory applications and the objections filed to such interlocutory applications are also considered as pleadings. When a contention is taken by the parties to the litigation, it is for them to prove their respective contentions. Generally, the party who is successful in proving his contention, will get the order in his favour and naturally, the other party must fail. In civil litigation, the standard of proof is only on the basis of 15 preponderance of probabilities. That means to say, the party who takes a stand or pleads a fact must probablize the same. 24. To constitute an offence of defamation under Section 499 of IPC, there must be an imputation with an intention to harm the reputation of other person or to defame him. But when any opinion is expressed in good faith on merits of the case or conduct of the parties, it cannot be termed as defamation. Similarly, when an imputation is made in good faith for protection of his own interest will also not amount to defamation. 25. In the present case, when the complainant has made some allegations against the accused by filing the suit and the interlocutory application seeking injunction, it is for the accused to take necessary defence both in the suit and also in the interlocutory application to safeguard his interest. It is for the accused to prove the defence taken by him at appropriate stage of the proceedings. Admittedly, the suit in O.S.No.83/2008 was pending, 16 atleast when the impugned order in criminal revision petition No.39/2015 was passed. It is for the parties to the litigation to prove their respective contentions by placing the oral and documentary evidence. Therefore, immediately, when a defence is taken making some imputation, automatically that will not amount to defamation. On the other hand, when the party takes a specific defence, wherein he makes imputation with an intention to harm the reputation of other party and fails to substantiate the same, it can be termed as defamation. Since the suit was pending, when the private complaint was filed, the stage of proving the imputation made by the accused was not yet reached and therefore, it could be said that the complaint was premature one. Even otherwise, when 5th exception of Section 499 of IPC exempts any expression or opinion made in good faith respecting the merits of the case or character or conduct of a party from the purview of defamation, the same will be applicable to the facts of the present case. At the most, it can be said that the accused had expressed his opinion 17 about the conduct of the complainant in filing the complaints and suits against others. 26. It is also pertinent to note that admittedly, the complainant had filed several complaints and suits against various persons including the accused and it is also admitted that few of such suits were dismissed with cost. Moreover, any imputation made in good faith by a person for protection of his own interest will not be construed as defamation as per 9th exception. The accused who was the defendant before the Trial Court in O.S.No.83/2008 was defending his own cause and filed counter statement to the interlocutory application, wherein, he has made imputation on the complainant. Definitely, such imputation is only to protect his own interest in the litigation. Therefore, this Court is of the opinion that the imputation made by the accused against the complainant which is referred to above cannot be termed as defamation under Section 499 of IPC. 18 27. I have gone through the impugned order passed by the Trial Court and Revisional Court. I do not find any reason to sustain the order of the Trial Court, but there is no reason to interfere with the order of the Revisional Court. 28. The learned counsel for the complainant relied on the decision in Afroz Mohammed Hasanfatta (supra) to contend that at the time of issuing process, the Magistrate is mainly concerned with the allegations made in the complaint or the evidence led in support of the same and the Magistrate has to be satisfied that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused. Further while issuing summons, the Magistrate need not explicitly state the reasons for his satisfaction that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused. This proposition of law is well settled as the same is reiterated by the Hon'ble Apex Court every now and then. There cannot be any dispute about this proposition of law. But at the same time, the Magistrate while taking cognizance and 19 while issuing process to the accused, should satisfy himself that there are sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused. For such satisfaction, the Magistrate has to consider the contention of the complainant and the requirement of law to constitute an offence. The Magistrate cannot blindly proceed to issue process accepting the contention of the complainant without application of mind regarding the requirement of law. 29. The learned counsel for the complainant also placed reliance on the decision in Amit Kapoor (supra) to highlight the scope of the Revisional Court under Section 397 of Cr.P.C. and also to highlight the unbridled powers of this Court under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. These propositions of law as laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court is also well settled and the same cannot be disputed. But the question is as to whether the Revisional Court has exceeded its limits under Section 397 of Cr.P.C. is to be considered. On consideration of the impugned order passed by the Revisional Court, the contention of the complainant that it 20 has exceeded its limits cannot be accepted. The Revisional Court cannot mechanically endorse the order passed by the Trial Court, which is under challenge without considering the said order on merits. It is the duty of the Revisional Court to scrutinize and satisfy itself about the legality and regularity of any order or proceeding which is the subject matter of the revision before it. In view of the same, I am not inclined to accept the contention taken by the learned counsel for the complainant that the Revisional Court has exceeded its limits in allowing the revision petition or that the learned Magistrate is justified in taking cognizance of the offence and in issuance of summons to the accused without application of mind. In view of the discussions held above, the petition is dismissed as devoid of merits. Sd/- JUDGE RSP