State vs . Roop Chand on 11 July, 2013 IN THE COURT OF SH. NAVJEET BUDHIRAJA, METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­04, SOUTH DISTRICT, NEW DELHI STATE VS. Roop Chand FIR NO: 748/05 P. S. Ambedkar Nagar U/s 380/34 IPC Unique ID no. 02403R0358612006 JUDGMENT Sl. No. of the case and : 1102/2 (14.2.2011) Date of its institution : 30.6.2006 Name of the complainant : Sh. Harinder Date of Commission of offence : 27.11.2005 Name of the accused : 1. Roop Chand (Since PO) 2. Panchori 3. Hirki 4. Vimla Offence complained of : Section 380 / 34 IPC Plea of accused : Not Guilty Case reserved for orders : 27.5.2013 Final Order : Convicted Date of Judgment : 11.7.2013 BRIEF STATEMENT OF FACTS FOR THE DECISION:­ 1. This is the prosecution of the aforesaid accused persons pursuant to a charge sheet State Vs. Roop Chand etc 1/16 FIR no. 748/05 filed by the Police Station Ambedkar Nagar under section 380 / 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short IPC ) subsequent to the investigation carried out by them in FIR no. 748/05. 2. Brief facts of the case of prosecution is that on 27.11.2005 complainant Harinder was sitting in his shop at Shop no. 2, Gali no. 19, DDA Market, Madangir, New Delhi and at around 12 pm, three ladies alongwith two male persons came in his shop. Three women accused persons started looking for jewelleries. They gave two sets of jewelleries to the two male persons. Complainant asked them to put the said jewelleries on the counter. In the meantime, the said male persons ran away with the said jewelleries. Those three ladies also started running away from the shop. He shouted and all the ladies were apprehended. However, those two male persons ran away with the jewelleries. Complainant called at 100 number bringing the investigative machinery into force. 3. On consummation of investigation and other formalities, charge sheet was submitted against the accused and the accused were indicted on charges under section 380 / 34 IPC. They pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Accused Roop Chand stopped appearing during the inquiry proceedings and was eventually declared proclaimed offender vide order dated 22.10.2007. 4. The prosecution, to prove above charges against the accused, tendered oral as well as documentary evidence. In all, eight witnesses were examined. PW 1/complainant Sh. Harinder deposed that on 27.11.2005 he was running a jewellery shop situated at Shop no.2, DDA Market,near Gali no.19 Madangir, New Delhi. On that day at about 12 noon, 3 women came to his shop and started looking the jewellery of his shop. Two male persons also came alongwith the three women in his shop. They were also looking the jewellery in his shop. While the abovementioned three women were looking the jewellery, they handed over two gold jewellery sets to the abovementioned State Vs. Roop Chand etc 2/16 FIR no. 748/05 two male persons. He asked them to put the gold jewellery set on the counter. In the meanwhile, the two male persons ran away from his shop alongwith the two gold jewellery sets. Thereafter, the abovementioned three women also started running away from his shop. He started screaming and managed to apprehend those three women alongwith the help of the persons nearby. But the abovementioned two male persons managed to run away from his shop alongwith the two gold jewellery sets. He called up the police. Police came at the spot. The name of three women were revealed as Panchauri, Hirki and Vimla. He gave his complaint to the police Ex.PW1/A. Accused Vimla, Panchauri and Hirki were arrested and their personal search were conducted vide memos Ex.PW1/B, Ex.PW1/C, Ex.PW1/D, Ex.PW1/E, Ex.PW1/F, Ex.PW1/G. Their disclosure statements were recorded vide memos Ex.PW1/H, Ex.PW1/I and Ex.PW1/J. Accused Hirki disclosed that their two male associates were Roop Chand and one another person whose name he does not remember and they were residing at Jahangir Puri vide Ex.PW1/M. He alongwith the police official went at Jahangir Puri where accused Roop Chand (since PO) met them there and he identified him correctly over there. He also admitted his guilt and disclosed that another person who was with them at the time of stealing the gold jewellery sets was having the stolen gold jewellery sets. Accused Roop Chand was arrested vide Ex.PW1/K which bears my signatures at point A. Police searched the room of accused Roop Chand but nothing was recovered. Police also prepared the site plan. Accused Roop Chand also pointed out the place from where he committed the offence of stealing the gold jewellery sets i.e his abovementioned shop vide pointing out memo Ex.PW1/L. He told to the police that the abovementioned stolen jewellery set was of 23 caret and he also told its cost to the police. He was cross examined by Ld. Legal Aid Counsel. 5. PW 2 Sh. Banwari deposed that on 27.11.05, he was running a tent house at J­II/73, State Vs. Roop Chand etc 3/16 FIR no. 748/05 Madangir, New Delhi. On that day at about 12 noon while he was going to his house via Gali no.19 and when he reached shop no.2, he saw that three women were coming out from the jewellery shop and going towards Hasti Bazaar. The jewellery shopkeeper was screaming about the theft of gold jewellery sets. He alongwith the help of other persons managed to appehend the abovementioned three women. Police arrested the abovementioned three women. He was cross examined by Ld. Legal Aid Counsel. 6. PW 3 is Ct. Satyapal Singh who proved his involvement in the investigation. He was cross examined by Ld. Legal Aid Counsel. 7. PW 4 Ct. Om Prakash deposed that on 27.11.2005 on receiving of DD no.11, PP Madangir, same is Mark A, he alongwith HC Bijender Singh reached at the spot i.e Gali no.19, Shop no.2, DDA Flat, Madangir, New Delhi where lady/HC Shobha was also found at the spot and produced all the three accused persons and gave her statement regarding the theft, same was recorded by HC Bijender Singh and on that basis HC Bijender Singh prepared rukka and present case was got registered through him. Investigation of the case was marked to SI Yashvir Singh who prepared site plan and arrested all the three accused persons namely Vimla, Panchouri and Hirki present in the Court today vide memos Ex.PW1/B, Ex.PW1/C and Ex.PW1/D and their personal search were carried out vide memos Ex.PW1/E, Ex.PW1/F and Ex.PW1/G and disclosure statement of all the three accused persons were recorded vide memo Ex.PW1/H, Ex.PW1/I and Ex.PW1/J. He was cross examined by Ld. Legal Aid Counsel. 8. Witness lady Ct. Shobha deposed that on 27.11.2005 she was posted at PS Ambedkar Nagar. On that day on receiving of DD no.11 she had reached at the spot i.e H.No. 2, DDA Market, near Gali no.19 where HC Vijender and Ct. Om Prakash also visited there and where shop owner/complainant Harender handed over three ladies namely Pachuri, Hirki and Vimla present in the Court today to HC Vijender Singh and Harender State Vs. Roop Chand etc 4/16 FIR no. 748/05 gave his statement, same was recorded by HC Vijender Singh. Thereafter, HC Vijender Singh prepared rukka and present case was got registered through Ct. Om Prakash. Investigation of the present case was assigned to SI Yashvir Singh. During the course of investigation, SI Yashvir Singh interrogated all the aforesaid three ladies where all the three ladies were arrested vide memo Ex.PW1/B, Ex.PW1/C and Ex.PW1/D and personal search of the accused persons were carried out vide memo Ex.PW1/E, Ex.PW1/F and Ex.PW1/G. Thereafter, all the aforesaid three ladies confessed their guilt vide statements Ex.PW1/H, Ex.PW1/I and Ex.PW1/J . Thereafter, all the three ladies were got medically examined. She was not cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons despite according opportunity. 9. PW 5 is HC Pappu Ram who proved the FIR as Ex.PW5/A. He was not cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons despite according opportunity. 10. PW 6 HC Vijender Singh deposed that on 27.11.2005 on receiving of DD no.11, same is Mark A he alongwith Ct. Om Prakash reached at the spot i.e H.No. 2, DDA Market, near Gali no.19 where lady constable Shobha Devi and shop owner/complainant Harender met them who produced accused persons namely Pachuri, Hirki and Vimla present in the Court today to them with the allegation of theft and Harender gave his statement, same was recorded by him and is Ex.PW1/A and on the basis of it, he prepared rukka, same is Ex.PW6/A and present case was got registered through Ct. Om Prakash. After registration of the case, investigation of the present case was assigned to SI Yashvir Singh who visited at the spot alongwith Ct. Om Prakash and prepared site plan and handed over the custody of all the aforesaid three accused through SI Yashvir Singh and thereafter, he left the spot. 11. PW 7 HC Narender Singh deposed that on 28.11.2005 he was involved in the investigation of this case with investigating officer. On that day accused Hirki was taken on PC remand and her disclosure statement was recorded wherein she State Vs. Roop Chand etc 5/16 FIR no. 748/05 confessed her guilt, same is Ex.PW1/L. Thereafter on the instance and identification of accused Hirki, Roop Chand was arrested vide memo Ex.PW1/K and his personal search was carried out vide memo Ex.PW7/A and thereafter accused Roop Chand also pointed out the place of commission of offence vide memo Ex.PW1/L. He was not cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons despite according opportunity. 12. PW 8 Inspector Aishvir Singh deposed that on 27.11.2005, he was posted as SI at PS Ambedkar Nagar. On that day, after registration of the case, investigation was assigned to him. During the course of investigation, he alongwith Ct. Om Prakash reached at the spot where complainant Harender, HC Vijender, Lady constable Shobha and three accused persons namely Pachuri, Hirki and Vimla met him. HC Vijender Singh handed over the custody of all the aforesaid three ladies to him. During the course of investigation, he prepared site plan on the instance of complainant Harender, same is Ex.PW8/A and arrested all the aforesaid three accused persons vide memo Ex.PW1/B, Ex.PW1/C and Ex.PW1/D and their personal search were carried out vide memo Ex.PW1/E, Ex.PW1/F and Ex.PW1/G. Thereafter, all the three accused persons made their disclosure statement wherein they confessed their guilt vide memos Ex.PW1/H, Ex.PW1/I and Ex.PW1/J. Thereafter, accused Hirki was taken on PC remand and during the course of PC remand, she further made disclosure statement same was recorded by him vide memo Ex.PW1/L and on the instance and identification of accused Hirki fourth accused Roop Chand was arrested vide memo Ex.PW1/K and his personal search was carried out vide memo Ex.PW7/A. Accused Roop Chand pointed out the place of commission of theft vide memo Ex.PW1/L. During the course of investigation, he recorded the statement of witnesses and after completion of investigation prepared charge sheet. He was not cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons despite according opportunity. 13. This is the overall prosecution's evidence in this case. Prosecution's evidence stood State Vs. Roop Chand etc 6/16 FIR no. 748/05 closed vide order dated 23.3.2013. 14. The statement of the accused persons under Section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short, `the Code') was recorded. They asserted that they were innocent and had been falsely implicated. Further, they chose not to lead any defence evidence. Consequently, matter was posted for final arguments. 15. I have heard the learned Assistant Public Prosecutor and the learned Advocate for the accused at length and carefully perused the record in extenso. Ld. APP has canvassed that the prosecution has been successful in proving the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. Accused persons have been identified by the prosecution witnesses and therefore must be convicted. 16. Per contra, learned defence counsel from legal aid Sh. Naushad Alam has canvassed that all the accused persons have been falsely implicated for the reason that no goods/stolen property have been found from the possession of the accused persons. It is further submitted that the two male persons whose names have found mentioned in the examination of the complainant were not in any way related to the accused persons. The accused persons have been made scapegoat as the investigating agency was unsuccessful in nabbing the two male persons who allegedly fled away with the jewellery of the complainant. Lastly, it is submitted that no public/independent person has been examined by the prosecution, therefore, the case of the prosecution deserves to be discarded. 17. To bring home an offence u/s 380 IPC, the prosecution has to prove the points i.e (a) there was a movable property; (b) that the said movable property was in the possession of person other than the accused; (c) that the accused took out it (or moved it) out of the possession of said person; (d) that the accused did it dishonestly i.e with intention to cause wrongful gain to himself or wrongful loss to another; (e) that the accused took the movable property or moved it without the consent of the State Vs. Roop Chand etc 7/16 FIR no. 748/05 possessor of the movable property required for proof of an offence u/s 379 IPC plus that the movable property was taken away or moved out of building or tent or vessel and that such building, tent or vessel was used either for human dwelling or for custody of movable properties. 18. To appreciate the case of the prosecution, I shall first try to find out as to what constitutes theft under "India Penal Code". Section 378 of Indian Penal Code defines "theft". In Section 378 , a reference is made to the expression "dishonestly". The said word "dishonestly" is defined under Section 24 of IPC. On reading Section 24 , I further find that a reading of Section 23 IPC will also be necessary to understand the real import of the expression, "dishonestly". So, to perceive as to what constitutes the offence of "theft", a joint reading of all the above sections is absolutely essential. I shall therefore extract all the above sections one by one as follows: " Section 378 : Theft.­ Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft". " Section 24 : "Dishonestly"­ Whoever does anything with the intention of causing wrong­ ful gain to one person or wrongful loss to another person, is said to do that thing "dishonestly". " Section 23 . 'Wrongful gain'.­ "Wrongful gain" is gain by unlawful means of property to which the person gaining is not legally entitled".'Wrongful loss'.­ 'Wrongful loss' is the loss by unlawful means of property to which the person losing it is legally entitled". 19. A close reading of Sections 378 , 24 and 23 IPC extracted above would show that proof of removal of a movable property by the accused alone will not be sufficient to establish "theft". Prosecution has to further prove that the accused had intended to take the movable property "dishonestly" as defined under Section 24 read with Section State Vs. Roop Chand etc 8/16 FIR no. 748/05 23 IPC . To prove that the accused intended to take the property "dishonestly", prosecution has also to establish that the accused intended to cause wrongful gain or wrongful loss of the movable property as stated in Section 23 of IPC. Thus, to prove the offence of "theft", prosecution has to establish that the accused moved the articles with the requisite intention contemplated by Section 378 IPC read with Sections 23 and 24 of IPC. 20. The main ingredients of offence of "theft" which are to be proved under Section 378 of IPC are therefore (1) that the offender had the intention to "take" a movable property out of possession of another without the consent of the latter; (2) that the offender had also intended to cause wrongful gain by unlawful means, of such property to which the person gaining is not entitled to or wrongful loss by unlawful means, of such property to which the person who is losing it is entitled to and (3) that with such intentions and in order to such "taking", the offender had moved such movable property. 21. Thus, it is clear that the offence of "theft" takes in both a physical act of 'moving' and also a specified intention. But, what exactly is the nature of the intention which is required to be proved to make out the offence of "theft"? Theft postulates two "intentions". Firstly, an intention of the accused to 'take' any movable property out of possession of another person without the consent of the other person. Secondly, an intention to cause wrongful gain by unlawful means, of such property to which the person gaining is not entitled to or to cause wrongful loss by unlawful means of such property to which the person losing is entitled to. Only if both such intentions of the accused are proved, an offence of "theft" as defined in Section 378 IPC will be established. 22. In order to bring home the charge against the accused persons, prosecution has adduced the evidence in the form of the testimony of PW 1 Harinder Kumar who is also the complainant in the present case. As per his testimony, on 27.11.2005 at about 12 State Vs. Roop Chand etc 9/16 FIR no. 748/05 noon, the three women came to his jewellery shop i.e Shop no. 2, DDA market, gali no. 19, Madangir, New Delhi to look for some jewellery. Two male persons also came alongwith those three women. It is further deposed that while the three women were looking the jewellery, they handed over two gold jewellery sets to the two male persons. Consequent upon this act of the three women, complainant asked them to put the gold jewellery sets on the counter and in the meanwhile, the two male persons ran away from his shop alongwith two gold jewellery sets. Thereafter, the three women also started running away from the shop following which he started screaming and managed to apprehend those three women alongwith the assistance of some persons. But the abovementioned two male persons managed to run away from his shop alongwith the two gold jewellery sets. He called the police, police came on the spot and names of those three women were revealed as Panchori, Hirki and Vimla. PW 1 correctly pin pointed all the accused persons to be those three women who came to his shop and committed theft of the two gold jewellery sets. He gave his complaint to the police Ex.PW1/A. 23. PW 1 was elaborately cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons wherein he has conceded that he did not maintain the record of sale of the jewellery as he was having small quantity of jewelleries i.e 5/6 at a time. He has further stated that no particular name was assigned to the stolen gold sets. It has further come in his cross examination that there were around seven sets in his shop, two of them were disapproved by the accused persons which he kept on the locker and within 10 minutes he realized that those two sets were stolen. 24. Prosecution has also examined PW 2 Banwari who is claimed to have nabbed the three accused women while they were trying to flee away from the spot. As per his deposition on 27.11.2005, while he was going to his house via gali no.19 and when he reached near shop no. 2, he saw three women coming out from the said jewellery shop State Vs. Roop Chand etc 10/16 FIR no. 748/05 and going towards Hasti Bazaar. The shopkeeper was screaming about the theft of the gold jewellery sets. He alongwith the help of other persons managed to nab the three accused persons who were later on arrested by the police. He was also cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons but nothing significant has come on record which could cast doubt on the veracity of his statement. In his cross examination, he again reiterated that he apprehended the accused persons as people were running after them shouting "chor­chor". 25. Furthermore, in the instant case, FIR has been promptly registered thereby ruling possibility of any embellishment or confabulation. The fact of registration of FIR has not been assailed by the accused persons. The three accused persons were arrested from the spot vide arrest memos Ex.PW1/B, Ex.PW1/C and Ex.PW1/D. 26. Before giving my finding on the issues involved in the instant case, it is desirable to highlight that the alleged theft of the gold articles had taken place in a jewellery shop situated at Shop no. 2, DDA market, gali no.19, Madangir, New Delhi. The factum of the theft in the said jewellery shop has not been disavowed by the accused persons. Furthermore, the presence of the three accused persons in the abovesaid shop at the time of the theft of the said jewellery articles has also not been refuted anywhere in the cross examination of the complainant PW 1. 27. These facts will certainly bring the case of the complainant within the ambit of section 380 of IPC as the said shop will fall within the province of the words used in the said section i.e "any building, tent or vessel used as a human dwelling or used for the custody of the property". 28. Post wading the statement of PW 1 Harinder Kumar and PW 2 Sh. Banwari, there is nothing on record to disbelieve their testimony. Statement of PW 1 Harinder Kumar before the Court finds sufficient corroboration from his initial statement given to the police i.e Ex.PW1/A. As mentioned in the preceding paragraph, all the three accused State Vs. Roop Chand etc 11/16 FIR no. 748/05 persons have not disavowed their presence in the said shop of the complainant. Furthermore, there is no suggestion on the part of the accused persons to PW 1 that those two male persons did not accompany them to the shop of the complainant. It has also not been suggested to the complainant/PW 1 that the accused persons did not have any connection with the two male persons who are stated to have fled away with two gold jewellery sets. 29. There is a categorical deposition of PW 1 Harinder Kumar that the three accused persons came to his shop and while they were on a look out for some jewellery, they handed over two gold jewellery sets to the unknown male persons who came alongwith them. Thereafter, those two persons immediately fled away with the two gold jewellery sets. The three accused persons also started to run away from the shop of the complainant but was later on nabbed by the complainant with the assistance of PW 2 Banwari. This deposition of the complainant will bring the case of the accused persons within the definition of theft u/s 378 IPC as all the accused persons came to the shop of the complainant with the dishonest intention of stealing some jewellery articles. While they were in the process of looking for some jewellery sets from the said shop, dishonestly handed over two gold jewellery sets to the other two male persons who accompanied them without the consent of the complainant/PW 1 despite raising objection by him that the three women should keep the gold jewellery sets on the counter. Furthermore, the act of the three accused persons trying to flee away from the spot manifests their wrongful conduct, which further strengthens the case of the prosecution that the three accused persons harbored the dishonest intention of taking away the gold jewellery sets belonging to the complainant. This dishonest intention on the part of the accused persons culminated into stealing the two gold jewellery sets thereby causing wrongful loss to the complainant. 30. It is the ambitious contention of Ld. Counsel for the accused persons that no such gold State Vs. Roop Chand etc 12/16 FIR no. 748/05 jewellery sets have been recovered from the possession of the accused persons. Therefore, they cannot be held liable for the same. To address this issue, it can be said that the case of the complainant is that two unknown male persons, who came alongwith three accused, were passed the gold jewellery sets by the three accused persons, those two persons immediately left the spot with the said gold jewellery articles. One of the said male persons was later arrested and whose name came to be known as Roop Chand, who was later on declared proclaimed offender as he did a vanishing act. 31. In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the considered opinion that the non recovery of the gold jewellery sets from the possession of the accused persons will not be fatal to the case of the prosecution as there exists cogent, reliable and trustworthy evidence in the form of testimony of PW 1 Harinder Kumar regarding the theft of two gold jewellery sets. Moreover, it is a settled legal proposition that non recovery of any weapon of offence or stolen article is not a sine qua non in recording conviction against the accused persons. To fortify my view reliance is placed upon the judgment in Mohd. Usman @ Sonu v. State (NCT) of Delhi , 7th January 2011 wherein it has been observed: "......There is no law which provides that in a case of a theft or robbery, recovery of the weapon of the offence or stolen goods is sine qua non for proving the guilt of the accused. If, for any reason whatsoever , accused after committing the offence is able to dispose, destroy or conceal the stolen property or the weapon of the offence, it cannot be taken as a reason to disbelieve the testimony of the victim if it is otherwise found reliable...." 32. It has been zealously argued by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons that no public witness has been examined or even cited by the prosecution in support of the case of the prosecution and some inconsistencies have cropped up in the cross examination of the complainant. As regards this anxiety of Ld. Counsel for the accused persons, it State Vs. Roop Chand etc 13/16 FIR no. 748/05 can be said that there is no bar in relying upon the testimony of sole eye witness, if his testimony is found to be unambiguous and reliable and there is nothing in law to not to take into consideration the testimony of single eye witness/complainant in the absence of the testimony of any other public witness. To answer this question, I would like to rely upon the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Jai Singh Rawat Vs. State (NCT of Delhi), ILR (2012) III, Delhi. Para 18 of the said judgment is as follows: "18.The evidence of an injured witness cannot be disbelieved without assigning cogent reasons. Mere contradictions/improvements on trivial matters cannot render an injured witness's deposition untrustworthy. The law on this aspect has been detailed in the latest judgment State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Naresh and ors. (2011) 4 SCC 324 as under: "27. The evidence of an injured witness must be given due weightage being a stamped witness, thus, his presence cannot be doubted. His statement is generally considered to be very reliable and it is unlikely that he has spared the actual assailant in order to falsely implicate someone else. The testimony of an injured witness has its own relevancy and efficacy as he has sustained injuries at the time and place of occurrence and this lends support to his testimony that he was present during the occurrence. Thus, the testimony of an injured witness is accorded a special status in law. The witness would not like or want to let his actual assailant go unpunished merely to implicate a third person falsely for the commission of the offence. Thus, the evidence of the injured witness should be relied upon unless there are grounds for the rejection of his evidence on the basis of major contradictions and discrepancies therein. )Vide Jarnail Singh Vs. State of Punjab, Balraje V. State of Maharashtra and Abdul Sayeed Vs. State of M.P .)" 33. Proceeding further, all the incriminating circumstances were put to the accused State Vs. Roop Chand etc 14/16 FIR no. 748/05 persons in their statement u/s 313 of the Code but none of the accused persons has preferred to give any explanation with regard to the allegations of theft against them. All of them simply denied all the incriminating evidence and claimed that they have been falsely implicated. But no evidence has been adduced by any of them to substantiate their claim of false implication. This is also not the case of the accused persons that they were daggers drawn with the complainant or that the complainant had an axe to grind against them so as to falsely implicate them in the present case. 34. Now coming to grip with charge under section 34 IPC against all the accused persons. Section 34 has been enacted on the principle of joint liability in the commission of a criminal act. The liability of one person for an offence committed by another in the course of criminal act perpetrated by several persons arises under section 34 if such criminal act is done in furtherance of a common intention of the persons who join in committing the crime. In the case titled Jagan Shravan Patil v. State of Maharashtra , 2009 (2) RCR (Criminal) 269, it has been held by Apex Court that where offence is committed by a number of persons in furtherance of common intention, direct proof of common intention is seldom available and, therefore, such intention can only be inferred from the circumstances appearing from the proved facts of the case and the proved circumstances. In order to bring home the charge of common intention, the prosecution has to establish by evidence, whether direct or circumstantial, that there was plan or meeting of mind of all the accused persons to commit the offence for which they are charged with the aid of section 34 , be it pre­ arranged or on the spur of the moment, but it must necessarily be before the commission of the crime. In the instant case, the testimony of witness PW 1 is specific that all the accused persons came together in his shop and while they were on the look out for some gold jewellery, handed over two gold sets to two other persons accompanying them, who then left the spot with two gold sets. This act of the three State Vs. Roop Chand etc 15/16 FIR no. 748/05 accused women is sufficient to extrapolate that all of them shared common intention of committing theft of gold sets and entered into the shop of the complainant with that intention and successfully carried out the heist. 35. In the light of the aforesaid narrative, I hold and observe that prosecution has been successful in assembling the case of theft of the gold jewellery sets in the shop of the complainant Harinder Singh. Accused persons have not oppugned their presence at the shop of the complainant on the given date and time. They have failed to tender any credible explanation regarding their connection with the two male persons to whom they had handed over the two gold jewellery sets and who later on fled away with the said two sets. Prosecution has been successful in establishing the ingredients of the offence u/s 380 IPC against the accused persons. Resultantly, all the accused persons stand convicted for offence u/s 380 / 34 IPC. Let they be heard on the point of sentence. Announced in the open court (Navjeet Budhiraja) on 11.07.2013 Metropolitan Magistrate­04, South, New Delhi State Vs. Roop Chand etc 16/16 FIR no. 748/05