N.Elangovan vs Mohana Sugumaran on 4 July, 2012 Author: C.S.Karnan Bench: C.S.Karnan IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS Dated: 04.07.2012 Coram THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE C.S.KARNAN Crl.R.C.No.17 of 2011 N.Elangovan .. Petitioner Vs. 1.Mohana Sugumaran Having Office at O/o.Deputy Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Krishnagiri Road, Tirupattur, Vellore District. 2.Manimaran, Having Office at O/o.Joint Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Dharmapuri Region, Dharmapuri Town. .. Respondents Prayer :- Criminal Revision is filed under Section 397 r/w 401 of Cr.P.C ., to set-aside the Return Endorsement Order dated 27.12.2010 of the learned Judicial Magistrate-I, Tirupattur, Vellore District made in C.C.SR.No.7769 of 2010 and issue appropriate direction to the said Magistrate's Court to entertain the said complaint on being re-presented, issue summons to the respondents/Accused without insisting any sanction order under Section 197 of Cr.P.C. For Petitioner : Mr.M.Balasubramanian For Respondents : No appearance - - - ORDER The short facts of the case are as follows:- The revision petitioner herein / complainant has filed C.C.S.R.No.7769 of 2010, against the respondents herein stating that he is serving as Secretary of Tirupattur Primary Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank Limited and is now under suspension. The petitioner submitted that he was served with a charge memo by the Special Officer on 12.12.2008, with an ulterior motive and mala-fide intentions. Hence, the petitioner has preferred a revision petition against the said charge memo before the second respondent herein viz., Manimaran, attached to the Joint-Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Dharmapuri Region, under Section 153 of Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act, 1983, along with a stay petition, on 15.12.2008 itself. The second respondent herein had rejected the revision petition by his order dated 31.12.2008, with an observation that the charge memo is not a final order and that the revision petition was not maintainable. 2. Subsequently, the petitioner was suspended from service as Secretary of the above said Primary Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank, on 12.03.2009 by the Special Officer stating that he was going to initiate disciplinary action against the revision petitioner. Thereafter, on 02.04.2009, the petitioner filed a revision petition against the suspension order before the second respondent. The second respondent rejected the said revision on 08.05.2009, with mala-fide intention and confirmed the suspension order stating that the revision petition was a premature one. 3. Thereafter, the revision petitioner herein has filed two writ petitions before this Court in W.P.Nos.11318 and 11319 of 2009 for quashing the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 and the suspension order dated 12.03.2009 respectively, passed by the Special Officer. This Court, after hearing both sides, was pleased to dismiss the writ petition in W.P.No.11318 of 2009, challenging the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 by granting liberty to him to challenge the order of the second respondent, rejecting his revision petition and to file it under Section 153 of Tamil Nad Co-operative Societies Act and allowed the other writ petition in W.P.No.11319 of 2009, quashing the order of the second respondent rejecting the revision and directed the second respondent to decide the matter afresh, considering the merits of the matter in issue, within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the order copy. The revision petitioner produced a copy of the order passed by this Court in writ petition along with this complaint in C.C.S.R.No.7769 of 2010, as document. 4. The revision petitioner has further submitted that as per this Court's order, the revision petitioner has filed a revision before the second respondent on 05.09.2009 under Section 153 of the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act, to set-aside the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 passed by the Special Officer and to quash the suspension order dated 12.03.2009 under document Nos.7 and 8 reply. Though this Court has directed the second respondent to dispose the revision, within two months from the date of receipt of the order copy, the second respondent was reluctant to dispose the revision, in spite of such specific direction given by this Court in the writ petition. Hence, the revision petitioner sent a letter to the second respondent and also caused a lawyer's notice through his counsel on 17.12.2009. After the receipt of the said notice, the second respondent disposed of the revision petition by quashing the charge memo dated 12.12.2008, in order dated 25.01.2010. The said letter addressed by the revision petitioner dated 16.11.2009 and the lawyer's notice dated 17.12.2009 are filed as documents along with the complaint. The revision petitioner has further submitted that in the said order, the second respondent herein set-aside the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 issued by the Special Officer except charge No.2 giving liberty that the management of the Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank may initiate action by framing fresh charges against the revision petitioner herein and dispose the same within two months. The revision petitioner sent a letter to the second respondent on 05.04.2010, requesting to implement the order in revision by order dated 25.01.2010 and also requested the first respondent to implement the order issued by the second respondent dated 25.01.2010, but the bank management did not implement the direction given in the revision petition to the second respondent herein. 5. The revision petitioner has further submitted that in view of the above, the Special Officer furnished the copy of letter No.7074 of 2008, dated 09.02.2009, to one Mohan attached to the Office of Deputy Registrar, in which the Special Officer had stated that fresh charges have been framed, which has already been disposed. The charges framed on 12.12.2008 was a charge already framed and disposed. The Management repeated the same allegation in order to wreck vengeance against this petitioner as done in the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 to victimize the petitioner again. Thus, the first respondent purposely singled out the petitioner alone. Moreover, even the earlier charge-memo dated 12.12.2008 did not attract any serious misconduct or offence necessitating the first respondent to suspend the revision petitioner from service, as the charges were trivial in nature. Thus, the first respondent has grossly abused and misused his official position and power, ill-treated and humiliated the revision petitioner herein and thereby also tarnished the image of the petitioner in the eyes of the public, the customers of the bank, relatives and among other staff members. 6. The revision petitioner has further submitted that by reason of the vindictive action taken by the first respondent, including suspension of the petitioner, the petitioner and his family members are put to lot of mental tension, stress and anguish since everybody in the known circle are questioning about the alleged charges levelled. The first respondent has not even paid subsistence allowance to the petitioner properly. In view of the undesirable situation, the petitioner's family members had to starve and they have also undergone unnecessary mental agony and shame. The first respondent has gone through everything without following the statutory procedure, but acted in a biased and autocratic manner and with an intent to tarnish the image of the revision petitioner among the customers, staff members, relatives and the public, and thereby the first respondent had committed the criminal offences under Sections 499 and 500 of I.P.C. The revision petitioner has further submitted that it is pertinent to point out here that the respondents 1 and 2, purposely have violated the lawful procedure and delayed in complying with the orders of High Court till today. Further, the first respondent had deliberately ordered charge No.2, being the one already quashed by the second respondent and thereby the first respondent grossly abused and misused his official position and also singled out the petitioner herein to victimize him and by allowing others to escape from the alleged charges. The way in which the respondents 1 and 2 have gone through the proceedings would establish that they have fabricated such offences against the petitioner to ruin his career and family, by abusing and misusing their official capacity and by creating false records, and thereby they are guilty of the offences under Sections 167 and 168 of I.P.C. as well. As such, the respondents are liable to be punished for the offence u/s 167, 182, 499 and 500 of I.P.C. 7. The revision petitioner has further submitted that the bank management was indulging in such unlawful acts ever since 1997. The petitioner was placed under suspension on 08.07.1997 and reinstated on 01.10.1997. Again, he was suspended on 22.10.1998 and reinstated on 27.09.2000. On 09.11.2005 he was suspended and again reinstated on 11.02.2006. Once again, he was suspended on 08.09.2006 and reinstated on 12.01.2007 and the present suspension which had taken place on 12.03.2009 is continuing. For all the above unlawful acts of the management, the Co-operation and connivance of the second respondent is evident and still the respondents are trying to take vengeance on the petitioner. The Special By-law relating to service conditions of employees of the bank clearly envisages that the period of suspension should not exceed three months in aggregate, but the first respondent grossly neglected the statutory provisions and has caused great hardship to the petitioner, with ultimate support of the second respondent. The respondents, in the guise of taking disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner, ever since 1997, failed to prove even a single charge and have misused their official position and violated the acts, rules and By-laws and had driven the petitioner to extreme hardship and poverty. The petitioner has further submitted that he had caused a lawyer's notice to the respondents on 03.08.2010. Though the respondents purposely avoided receipt of notice, they finally received the same in their residential address. The second respondent having acknowledged the said notice had not chosen to send any reply. The copy of the notice is also filed along with the complaint. Subsequently, the petitioner has sent a representation dated 06.09.2010 to the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Chennai-10, seeking permission to prosecute the respondent. Though the said authority acknowledged the said representation, he has not passed any orders so far. Having waited for a sufficient period of time, the petitioner has come forward with the present complaint. 8. Therefore, the petitioner has prayed before the Judicial Magistrate-I, Tiruppatur to punish the respondents for the offences committed by them under Section 167, 182, 499 and 500 of I.P.C. 9. After receipt of the said complaint, the Judicial Magistrate-I, Tiruppattur has passed the following order:- " Section 164 cognizance of offences: (1) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall try any offence under this Act. (2) Every offence under this Act shall, for the purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure . 1973 (Central Act 2 of 1974) be deemed to be non-cognizable. (3) No prosecution shall be instituted under this Act without the previous sanction of the Register and such sanction shall not be given without giving to the person cornered a reasonable opportunity to represent his case. Hence, under the above Act previous sanction should be necessary to institution complaint. The above Act has coming into force on 13.04.1988. The above complaint has been preferred under Sections 499 and 500 IPC and also with Section 167 , 182 IPC. Section 167 Public Servant framing incorrect document with intent with cause injury. Section 182 false information with intent cause information public servant to use his lawful power to the injury of another person. From this it is very clear complainant has preferred this complaint to take action against the respondents who are public servant. The contention of complaint is also that respondents are public servant. Section: 197 Cr.P.C . Prosecution of Judges and Public Servants (1) When any person, who is or was a judge or Magistrate or a public servant not removable from his offence save by or with the sanction of Government, is accused of any offence alleged to have been committed by him while action or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, Court shall take cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction (a) in the case of a person who is employed or as the case may be was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the Union of Central Government (b) in the case of person who is employed or, as the case may was at the time of commission of the alleged offence employed, in connection with the affairs of the State Government. On going through the complaint, the complaint is that the respondents while acting in a official capacity has done the above offences. Hence, from the complainant's contention itself the respondents are public servant. Hence, previous sanction of the Registrar is necessary, complainant has not filed any sanction given by the Registrar. Hence, this Court has not taken cognizance of offence against the respondents. This Complaint is hereby returned to file after getting sanction from the authority concerned." 10. Aggrieved by the said impugned order, the above revision has been filed by the revision petitioner / complainant. 11. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner submits that the respondents herein had served charge memo on 12.12.2008, with an ulterior motive and mala-fide intention. Against the said charge memo, the revision petitioner has filed the revision before the second respondent herein, as per Section 153 of the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act, on 15.12.2008. The same has been rejected by the second respondent with an observation that the charge memo is not a final order and as such, the revision petition is not maintainable. Subsequently, the revision petitioner was suspended from service as Secretary of the above said Primary Co-operative and Rural Development Bank on 12.03.2009, by the Special Officer stating that he was going to initiate disciplinary action against the petitioner herein. Aggrieved by the said suspension order, the revision petitioner has filed a revision before the second respondent herein on 08.05.2009. The same has been rejected by the second respondent. As such, both the respondents have jointly colluded with each other and operated their power vested with them against the revision petitioner herein. Without giving an opportunity for enquiry, on the said charge memo, the suspension order was passed by the first respondent. The same has been pointed out before the second respondent by way of revision petition. The second respondent, without applying his mind had rejected the revision petition in-limini. As such, the revision petition has not been disposed of on merits. It clearly proves that both the respondents, with mala-fide intentions, had harassed the revision petitioner herein. This kind of activity of the respondents is in violation of the fundamental and personal rights of the petitioner and hence, the aggrieved revision petitioner had approached this Court and has filed two writ petitions, viz., W.P.No.11318 of 2009, challenging the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 and prayed for quash and another writ petition in W.P.No.11319 of 2009, challenging the suspension order dated 12.03.2009. The learned judge of this Court was pleased to dismiss the writ petition in W.P.No.11318 of 2009, granting liberty to the revision petitioner to challenge the charge memo before the second respondent under Section 153 of Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act. The other writ petition in W.P.No.11319 of 2009 was allowed quashing the order of the second respondent, rejecting the revision petition and directing the second respondent to decide the matter afresh, considering the merits of the matter in issue, within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order. The writ order copy was communicated to the respondents, but in spite of this, the second respondent was reluctant to dispose the revision. Hence, a lawyer's notice was caused to him. Then, the second respondent disposed the revision petition by quashing the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 in his order dated 25.01.2010. As per his order, the second charge mentioned in the charge memo, the Management of the Co-operative Agricultural and Rural Development Bank may initiate action by framing fresh charges against the petitioner and to dispose the same, within two months. As such, the second respondent has caused injustice to the petitioner. The learned counsel further submits that as per the order of the second respondent on 25.01.2010, the first respondent did not implement the same. 12. The learned counsel further submits that the management repeated the same allegation in order to wreck vengeance against the petitioner as done in the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 to victimize the petitioner again. Thus, the first respondent had purposely singled out the petitioner alone. The charge memo dated 12.12.2008 does not show any serious misconduct to suspend the petitioner from service, as the charges were trivial in nature. But, the first respondent had wantonly and deliberately had grossly abused and misused his official position and power. As such, the petitioner has been ill treated and humiliated and his image has also been tarnished in front of the public, customers of bank, relatives and among staff members. The learned counsel further submits that because of the vindictive action taken by the first respondent, the petitioner and his family members have been put into irreparable loss and mental agony. During the suspension period, the revision petitioner has not been paid subsistence allowance to maintain his family and himself. As such, the first respondent is squarely attracted to be punished as per Criminal law. The first respondent had acted in a biased and autocratic manner and caused injustice towards the petitioner herein. As such, the first respondent had tarnished the image of the petitioner among the customers, staff members, relatives and the public. As such, the first respondent has committed a criminal offence under Section 499 and 500 of I.P.C. The learned counsel further submits that the first respondent deliberately added charge No.2, being the one already quashed by the second respondent and thereby the first respondent grossly abused and misused his official position and also singled out the petitioner to victimize him and by allowing the others to escape from the alleged charges. 13. The learned counsel vehemently argued that the respondents have jointly fabricated such offences against the petitioner to ruin his career and family by abusing and misusing their official capacity and by creating false records and thereby they are guilty of the offences under Section 167 , 168 , 499 and 500 I.P.C. The learned counsel further submits that in order to punish the respondents herein, the revision petitioner herein has initiated complaint before the learned Judicial Magistrate-I, Tirupattur and the same has been rejected at the preliminary stage. The complaint in support of his case has listed 19 documents, which are relating to the said case. Without giving an opportunity, the complaint had been rejected by the learned Magistrate. Hence, the learned counsel entreats the Court to allow the criminal revision and set-aside the written endorsements made by the learned Magistrate. The learned counsel has cited the following judgment in support of his contentions:- S.S.Dhanoa v. Delhi Municipality reported in AIR 1981 SUPREME COURT 1395 "Penal Code (45 of 1860), S.21 , Cl(12) - Public servant - Definition of - Does not include Civil servant working on deputation with co-operative society - Sanction under S.197 Cr.P.C. not necessary for his prosecution  "Corporation" occurring in S.21 , Cl.(12)(b)-Does not include Co-operative Society (Criminal P.C.(1974), S.197-Bombay Co-operative Societies Act (7 of 1925), (Ss.10,23) )Words and Phrases-Public servant)" 14. On verifying the factual position of the case, this Court is of the view that, (i) As per Section 167 in the language contained therein, it has been mentioned that "public servants framing an incorrect document with intent to cause injury.-Whoever, being a public servant, and being as (such public servant, charged with the preparation or translation of any document or electronic record, frames, prepares or translates that document or electronic record) in a manner which he knows or believes to be incorrect, intending thereby to cause of knowing it to be likely that he may thereby cause injury to any person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both". This Court opines that on the same cause of action, and on the same irregularities, the writ petitions have been filed by the revision petitioner herein. (ii) In the language of Section 182 , it is seen that, "False information with intent to cause public servant to use his lawful power to the injury of another person - Whoever gives to any public servant any information which he knows or believes to be false, intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, such public servant - (a) to do or omit anything which such public servant ought not to do or omit if the true state of facts respecting which such information is given to, were known by him; or (b) to use the lawful power of such public servant to the injury or annoyance of any person; shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both." This Court is of the view that the respondents have passed order as per Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act . If any irregularity or illegality have been committed by the respondents, the same can be pointed out before the appellate authority of the department or can be set right by approaching the proper judicial forum and such issues cannot be resolved through criminal Court since the respondents order has been given after following laws laid down in the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Act, 1983 . (iii) In the language contained as in Section 499, it has been mentioned that, "Defamation.-Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or published any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. This Court is of the view that the respondents administrative order cannot be construed as a defamation against the revision petitioner herein, as only a charge memo dated 12.12.2008 had been served on the revision petitioner wherein the revision petitioner herein had been asked to give his explanations on the charges framed against him, such an action cannot be termed as a defamatory act against the petitioner herein. (iv) In the language of Section 500, it has been mentioned that, "Punishment for defamation- Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. As the respondents herein have already been found by this Court not to have committed any offence under Section 499, the penal provisions in Section 500 is not applicable as against the respondents. (v) On the same cause of action, i.e., charge memo issued by the first respondent herein on 12.12.2008, the revision petitioner herein has challenged the same before the second respondent herein by way of revision petition, and therefore, the criminal case cannot be made out against the respondents. (vi) The revision petitioner had initiated two writ petitions viz., W.P.No.11318 of 2009, challenging the charge memo dated 12.12.2008 and another writ petition in W.P.No.11319 of 2009, challenging the suspension order dated 12.03.2009 and the revision petitioner had pointed out the irregularities and illegalities and fabricated document before this Court. After well considering the revision petitioner's contention, this Court passed final order in both writ petitions. Against the two orders, as on date, no appeal or revision or review has been filed by the revision petitioner. Under the circumstances, on the same cause of action, i.e, impugned order of the first respondent, the criminal complaint filed in C.C.S.R.No.7769 of 2010 is not sustainable under criminal law. 15. After hearing the arguments of the learned counsel for the revision petitioner and on perusing the impugned order of the learned Magistrate and this Court's view listed as (i) to (vi), this Court holds that the above revision is not maintainable. 16. In the result, the above revision is dismissed. Consequently, the order passed in C.C.SR.No.7769 of 2010 , on the file of learned Judicial Magistrate-I, Tirupattur, Vellore District, dated 27.12.2010 is confirmed. 04.07.2012 r n s Index : Yes. Internet : Yes. C.S.KARNAN, J r n s To The Judicial Magistrate-I, Tirupattur, Vellore District. Crl.R.C.No.17 of 2011 04.07.2012