Jadvinder Singh vs Parvinder Singh & Ors on 15 September, 2022 THE COURT OF MS. SHIVALI SHARMA ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE­03: WEST DISTRICT TIS HAZARI COURT: DELHI CS No. 610197/16 In the matter of:­ 1. JADVINDER SINGH s/O Sh. Abnashi Singh R/o 5/49, Punjabi Bagh, Delhi. .................Plaintiff Versus 1. PARVINDER SINGH & ORS. S/o Sh. Abhinashi Singh R/o 5/49, Punjabi Bagh, Delhi 2. HARWINDER KAUR S/o Parwinder Singh R/o 5/49, Punjabi Bagh, Delhi. ............Defendants Date of institution : 01.06.2012 Date of Decision : 15.09.2022 JUDGMENT SUIT FOR RCOVERY OF DAMAGES. 1. This is a suit for compensation /damages to the Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 1/16 tune of Rs.19,50,000/­ filed by the plaintiff against two defendants. Defendant no. 1 is the real brother of the plaintiff and defendant no. 2 is the wife of defendant no. 1. PLEADINGS: PLAINTIFF'S CASE: 2. The case of the plaintiff as per plaint is that the plaintiff has utmost love and affection towards his younger siblings and has supported his father in his business as well as took active part in marriages of his siblings and other family functions. Due to the conduct of the plaintiff towards the family, father of the plaintiff executed a Will in his favour registered on 07.07.2001 bequeathing certain moveable and immovable properties in his favour. The Will also noted the cruelty meted out to the father of the plaintiff at the hands of the defendants. One immovable property of the father of the plaintiff in West Punjabi Bagh bearing no. 5/49 was also gifted to the plaintiff by way of a registered Will dated 08.10.2003. However, plaintiff allowed the defendants to continue in possession of two room sets situated at back side of Punjabi Bagh property for a few days on their request. The defendants started misbehaving with the father of the plaintiff. They also failed to vacate the said property despite repeated requests. 3. On one day in the year 2001, defendant no. 1 caught hold of the father of the plaintiff through his collar and grappled with him, torn his shirt and slapped him. The matter Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 2/16 was reported to police as well as local Gurudwara. Many people gathered at the spot supporting the father of the plaintiff however, defendants did not show any repentance. Defendant no. 1 was officially ex­communicated from the sikh society. The incident also physically affected the father of the plaintiff. In order to maintain peace, the plaintiff shifted to another property in Punjabi Bagh with his family while retaining the constructive possession of property No. 5/49, Punjabi Bagh West, wherein defendants were living in two room set on the back side as a licencee whose licence had been terminated by the plaintiff. 4. Certain civil litigations were pending between the parties before Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in which one Local Commissioner and one Architect was appointed. Hon'ble High Court of Delhi, on an application of defendant no. 1 in the said suit directed that any repairs in the property would be carried out by Sh. Gurmeet Singh Chauhan, Architect appointed as Court Commissioner. However, defendant no. 1 started raising unauthorized construction in the said property and matter was reported to police. When plaintiff tried to stop the defendants from raising unauthorized construction the defendants grappled with the plaintiff, defendant no. 2 pulled the beard of the plaintiff and forcefully hit at his turban and pulled his hair. Defendant no. 1 started hurling abuses on the plaintiff stating " sale tu chor ki aulad hai aur tune aur tare baap ne mujhe ghar se bekdakhal kar diya hai, woh budha toh mar gaya hai ab mai tujhe bhi maar kar yaha gaad dunga". Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 3/16 Defendant no. 1 also threatened the plaintiff and his wife to implead them in false cases and used abusive words towards them. Plaintiff and his wife were also physically abused and their clothes were torn. 5. The plaintiff was saved after the police reached the spot. However, instead of registering an FIR, a Kalandara u/s 107 / 150 Cr.P.C was prepared on the false statement of the defendants consisting of derogatory allegations in the presence of the general public in order to defame the plaintiff. Plaintiff filed a criminal complaint against the defendants u/s 323 / 341 / 448 / 192 / 193 / 196 / 211 /499/500/503/506/34IPC. Defamatory statements and imputations were made against the plaintiff in the presence of general public which tarnished the good reputation of the plaintiff. Accordingly, they are liable for an action for defamation. The plaintiff and his family were robbed of their mental peace which completely shattered their confidence and damaged their personality because of the defamatory imputations made by the plaintiff in the presence of general public. For the physical injury and the mental trauma due to imputation/unnecessary harassment due to the false complaints/damage to their property because of the illegal construction at the hands of the defendants, the plaintiff is alleged to be entitled to a compensation of Rs.19,50,000/­ for the recovery of which the present suit has been filed. DEFENDANT'S CASE: Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 4/16 6. Defendants filed their joint written statement wherein the suit is preliminarily objected to on the ground that the plaintiff has concealed material facts from the court and filed the suit on the basis of false, frivolous and fabricated averments. Plaintiff is alleged to be a resourceful man both financially as well as influentially who is misusing the law against the defendants. It is stated that the plaintiff had deliberately physically and verbally abused the defendants on 24.08.2012 for which a case under Section 107 / 150 Cr.P.C was registered which has been disposed off by Ld. SEM vide order dated 24.08.2012 observing that the disputes between the parties is over the property which is a civil matter by nature and both the parties have been directed to maintain peace and proceed the matter as per law. The entire case is alleged to be based on Kalandara No. 67B dated 23.02.2012, P.S. Punjabi Bagh but nothing like the defamatory statement mentioned in this suit are contained in the said kalandara. As regards the litigation before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi they are still pending and there is no final decision in the said litigation. 7. On merits, all the allegations made against the defendants have been denied. It is stated that the present proceedings are nothing but means to pressurize the defendants to leave their lawful share in the Punjabi Bagh property. REPLICATION: Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 5/16 8. Replication was filed by the plaintiff to the written statement filed by the defendants wherein he reiterated and reaffirmed the averments made in the plaint and denied the averments made in the written statement except the admissions made. ISSUES: 9. After completion of pleadings, vide order dated 05.09.2014 the following issues were framed:­ (i) Whether the plaintiff has been defamed by defendant nos. 1 and 2 as alleged in the plaint? OPP. (ii) If the answer to issue no. 1 is affirmative, whether the plaintiff is entitled to damages? If so, what should be the quantum thereof? OPP (iii) Whether the suit is bad for misjoinder of parties, as alleged in the written statement ?OPD 1 and 2 (iv) Relief. PLAINTIFF'S EVIDENCE: Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 6/16 10. Plaintiff examined himself as PW­1 in his evidence. He stated and reiterated on oath the averments made in his plaint in his affidavit Ex.PW1/A. He relied upon the following documents:­ (i) Ex. PW­1/1 : Copy of Will dated 07.07.2001(OSR) (ii) Ex. PW­1/2: Copy of Gift deed dated 08.10.2003(OSR). (iii)Mark A & B : Copies of report of Local Commissioner appointed in Civil Suit No. 1739/03. (iv) Mark C : Copy of DD entry No. 34B dated 29.12.2011 alongwith copy of complaint. (v) Mark D & E: Copy of MLC No. 2866 and 2867. 11. Plaintiff was duly cross examined on behalf of the defendants. 12. Wife of the plaintiff Smt. Inderjeet Kaur was examined as PW­2. Her testimony as regards the incident dated 23.02.2013 is in consonance with the deposition of PW­1. She deposed vide her evidence affidavit Ex. PW­2/A. She was also duly cross­examined on behalf of the defendants. Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 7/16 13. PW­3 is one Gurvinder Singh being a known person to parties to the suit. He deposed vide his affidavit Ex. PW­3/1 that on 23.02.2012 he had gone to the spot after receiving information about the quarrel between the parties. He met plaintiff and his wife and accompanied them to inside of the property 5/49 Punjabi Bagh and found that unauthorized construction was being carried on by the defendants. He tried to intervene to avoid further dispute between the parties and to ensure that peace and harmony was maintained between them. He was also duly cross­examined on behalf of the defendants. 14. No other witness was examined on behalf of the plaintiff. DEFENDANT'S EVIDENCE: 15. Both the Defendants filed their affidavits in evidence. Defendant no. 1 Parvinder Singh even tendered his evidence as Ex. DW­1/1 on 04.03.2020 but thereafter did not appear before the court for his cross­examination. Defendant no. 2 also failed to step into the witness box despite repeated opportunities. DE was closed by the order of the court vide order dated 04.04.2022. 16. Final arguments have been heard on behalf of plaintiff and record carefully perused. Defendants did not come forward to finally argue the matter nor filed any written Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 8/16 submissions despite opportunities. FINDINGS: 17. Now I shall proceed to give my issuewise findings:­ Issue no. 3 Whether the suit is bad for mis­joinder of parties, as alleged in the written statement?OPD 1 and 2. 18. The onus to prove this issue was on defendants. This issue has been framed on the preliminary objection taken by the defendants in their WS to the effect that the suit is bad in law for mis­joinder of parties. However, no explanation is given in the written statement/preliminary objection as to for whose misjoinder the present suit is bad. The defendants had neither led any evidence to support this issue nor any arguments have been address to clarify as to misjoinder of which of the parties suit is bad. The plaintiff has filed the present suit seeking compensation for damages from the defendants on the ground of imputations and unnecessary harassments made against him due to the false complaints lodged by the defendants. Accordingly, from the plaint, all the parties impleaded in the suit are necessary and proper parties. 19. In the absence of any evidence to support this issue, this issue is decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants. Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 9/16 Issue no.1 Whether the plaintiff has been defamed by defendant nos. 1 and 2 as alleged in the plaint? OPP. 20. The onus to prove this issue was on the plaintiff. The plaintiff has filed the present suit seeking compensation for defamation caused to him at the hands of the defendants. 21. In Civil jurisdiction, Defamation is a tort that involves injury to reputation. Any act by which reputation of a person is injured becomes actionable. Defamation is the publication of the statement which tends to lower the dignity of a person in the estimation of right­thinking members of society due to which society or such persons starts avoiding the persons defamed. Defamation involves libel, or slander. 22. A libel is a publication of false and defamatory imputation in some permanent form tending to injure the reputation of another without any lawful justification or excuse. Slander, on the other hand, is a false and defamatory verbal statement intending to injure reputation of another person. 23. The essential requirements to prove defamation in civil law in order to entitle a person to claim damages for injury caused due to defamation are:­ (i). The matter complained of must be defamatory. It Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 10/16 should have lowered the reputation of the plaintiff in the estimation of others and caused him to be shunned by the society. (ii). It must be false and should not be privileged or in the nature of fair and bona fide comments. (iii). It must refer to the plaintiff. (iv). It must be published. (v). It must be published by the defendant. (vi). It must have caused special damage to the plaintiff. 24. The words which expose the plaintiff to hatred, contempt, ridicule or oblique motive or injure him in his profession, trade or cause him to be shunned are deemed to be defamatory in nature. 25. The offence of defamation is defined in Section 499 IPC and is punishable under Section 500 IPC. Explanation 4 to Section 499 IPC specifically states that no imputation is said to harm a person's reputation unless that imputation, directly or indirectly in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 26. Let us now examine the facts of the present case in the light of the above discussed law on defamation. Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 11/16 27. The incident qua which the allegations of defamation have been made is mentioned in Paragraph no. 2 on Page no.8 of the plaint. The same is reproduced herein under for the sake of clarity. "That in the garb of alleged repairs,both the defendants were carrying out the said unauthorized construction in the property in a wrong and illegal way on 23.02.2012 and after receiving the information from the neighbourhood the plaintiff along with his wife and his two friends namely Sh. Dharampal and Sh. Gurvinder Singh reached at the spot i.e. 5/49, Punjabi Bagh West, New Delhi to find that a few man labour, along with a mason, were involved in the new constructions in the area, on the front side, which is in the occupation and the constructed possession of the plaintiff, only on the illegal directions of both the defendants, who were also present there, and thereafter then and there, the plaintiff and his wife, raised their voice in order to discourage the labour as well as to both the defendants, but all their hue and cry fell flat on the defendants, and instead of stopping the labour, both the defendants grappled the plaintiff and defendant no.2, pulled the bear of the plaintiff, and forcefully hit at his turban, and also pulled his hair, and the defendant no.1 started hurling the abuses on the plaintiff by quoting, " saale tu chor ki aulaad hai aur tune aur Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 12/16 tere baap ne mujhe ghar se bedhakhal kar diya hai, wo buddha to mar gaya hai, ab mai tujhe bhi mar kar yaha gadh dunga" and the defendant no.2 yelled upon the plaintiff and his wife and uttered " aaj tum dono bhenchod ko jhuthe case mai fasayenge, aur tum dono aaj yahee se jail jayoge" along with giving the slaps and punch blows on the person of the plaintiff, which made the plaintiff a little semi­conscious, and during this, the wife of the plaintiff and his friends namely Sh. Dharampal and Sh. Gurvinder Singh tried to intervene in order to save the plaintiff and his wife then both the defendants threatened them to their life, and simultaneously the defendant no.1 accosted the wife of the plaintiff and started giving the punch blows on her face and chest and torn off her clothes and addressed her, as saying, "Tu baimaan(dishonest) aur chor hai, aur tu yahan par kyon aai hai, aaj tujhe bhi yahi jaan se maar denge aur tum dono ko yahi ghaad denge." 28. The plaintiff (PW­1) and his wife(PW­2) have deposed about this incident dated 23.02.2012 in paragraphs no. 14 and paragraph no. 2 of their respective evidence affidavits that are Ex. P­1 and Ex. PW­2/A. One independent witness PW­3 namely Sh. Gurvinder Singh has been examined to support the said contention, however this witness has not deposed about any defamatory imputations made by the Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 13/16 defendants against the plaintiff. He has merely deposed about the unauthorized construction which was being raised by the defendants at the property in question and how he had intervened in order to avoid scuffle between the parties. A kalandra bearing no. DD­67 B dated 23.02.2012 PS Punjabi Bagh u/s 107 / 150 CrPC was registered regarding the incident dated 23.02.2012, copy of which is on record as Ex. DW­1/A. Although, DW­1 has not been fully cross­examined but the registration of this kalandra has been duly admitted by the plaintiff in his plaint itself. 29. Perusal of this kalandra shows that there are no allegations of defamatory imputations made by the plaintiff against the defendants. Accordingly, on record, there is no other evidence regarding the defamatory imputations allegedly made by the defendants against the plaintiff during the incident dated 23.02.2012 except for the ocular testimonies of the plaintiff/ PW­1 and his wife/PW­2 against whom the defamatory imputations are alleged to have been made. Even the alleged eye witness to the incident/PW­3 has not supported the case of the plaintiff on this aspect and this deposition is completely silent regarding the alleged defamatory imputations made by the defendant against the plaintiff. 30. Then, in the present case, there is no evidence on record to hold that the alleged imputations made by the defendant against the plaintiff had lowered the character of the plaintiff in the eyes of public at large. The lowering of the Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 14/16 character has to be seen from the standpoint of a bystander and not the victim himself. Thus, unless a witness appears before the Court and depose about the making of defamatory imputations against the plaintiff in his presence and its effect on their reputation in his eyes, it cannot be held that plaintiff has been defamed. Accordingly, technically the plaintiff cannot be held to have been defamed by the defendants. 31. Since the plaintiff has failed to examine any independent witness in whose presence, the defamatory imputations were made against him by the defendants which resulted in lowering of his reputation in the eyes of that person, it cannot be held that plaintiff has been defamed by defendants no. 1 and 2 as alleged in the plaint. 32. In view of the reasons given above, this issue is decided in favour of the defendants and against the plaintiff, holding that plaintiff has failed to prove on record that he was defamed by defandants. Issue no. 2 If the answer to issue no. 1 is affirmative, whether the plaintiff is entitled to damages? If so, what should be the quantum thereof? OPP 33. The onus to prove this issue was on the plaintiff. In view of my issue­wise findings on issue no.1 given above, since the plaintiff has failed to prove that he has been defamed by the defendants as alleged by him, he cannot be awarded any Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 15/16 damages on this account. Even otherwise, no evidence has been led by the plaintiff regarding the estimation of the damages. A random figure of Rs. 19,50,000/­ has been prayed as damages without even explaining the reason for which the same is being prayed. 34. In view of the reasons given above, no damages can be awarded in favour of the plaintiff. This issue is, accordingly, decided in favour of the defendants and against the plaintiff. RELIEF: 35. In view of my issue wise findings given above, the suit of the plaintiff is dismissed. No orders as to cost. 36. Decree sheet be prepared accordingly. 37. File be consigned to record room after due compliance. Digitally signed Announced in the open court SHIVALI by SHIVALI SHARMA SHARMA Date: 2022.09.15 16:24:07 +0530 on: 15.09.2022. (SHIVALI SHARMA) ADJ­03/WEST/THC/DELHI 15.09.2022 Civ. DJ. No. 610197/16 Jadvinder Singh Vs Parvinder Singh & Anr. 16/16