Sh. S.K. Lamba vs Media Content & Communications on 28 August, 2018 IN THE COURT OF SH. SANJEEV KUMAR­I, ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE­12, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI CS No. 14058/16 Sh. S.K. Lamba, IAS (Retired), T­1904, Upper Ridge Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi. .... Plaintiff Versus 1. Media Content & Communications Services (India) Pvt. Ltd., A­37, Sector­60, Noida, U.P. (Carrying on business in the name and Style of Star News). 2. Sh. Ashish K. Singh, (The Then) News Correspondent (Dehradun), C/o Star News (Delhi) TV Channel, 15/4, Pleasant Valley, Rajpur Road, Dehradun. ..... Defendants. Date of institution : 28.09.2007 Date of reserving Judgment : 21.08.2018 Date of decision : 28.08.2018 SUIT FOR DAMAGES. Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 1 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. JUDGMENT Vide this judgment, I shall decide the suit for damages filed by the plaintiff. 2. Brief facts as stated by the plaintiff are that the plaintiff is a retired IAS Officer and he is retired as Additional Secretary (Home), Government of Uttranchal now Uttrakhand while defendant No. 1 is a TV Channel namely Star News and defendant No. 2 is his correspondent. On 27.9.2004, the plaintiff received numerous calls from various persons including his friends, relatives, officers of State Government, Central Government, Acquaintances and even subordinates inquiring with respect to some news clipping having been telecasted on "Star News" between 8.30 am to 8.45 am on 27.9.2004 imputing certain uncreditable and defamatory attributions against the plaintiff. He inquired from various sources and learnt that on 27.9.2004, in the morning, the defendant No. 1 through defendant No. 2 had telecasted some news clipping on "Star News" Channel that an IAS Officer of Uttranchal has been dismissed from services because of not following the laid down rules in the recruitment of Patwaris. When the said news was telecasted, the plaintiff's office premises, his name plate etc. were shown in the background to the public at large with solitary motive and intend to add authenticity and truthfulness to the news. He also learnt from reliable sources that the said news had been telecasted deliberately to lower down his reputation at the Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 2 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. saying, instigation and conspiring of some vested interest to make the plaintiff a controversial person just three days prior to his retirement . Plaintiff served the defendants legal notice dated 1.3.2005 by registered post which was received by defendant No. 1 and after receipt of said notice, the defendant had deputed some of his representatives who had been assuring the plaintiff that due justice will be done and told that they are conducting probe into the matter and if needed, they will telecast a detailed news specifying their regret and shall be presenting a right news as a corrigendum and they also promised to adequately compensate but to no effect. Hence, the plaintiff filed the present suit for recovery of Rs. 5 lacs as damages against the defendants. 3. Summons to the suit were served to the defendants. The defendant No. 1 filed written statement in which the defendant No. 1 has taken following preliminary objection :­ (i) That the alleged defamatory telecast said to have been made on 27.9.2004 and the present suit has been filed on 28.9.2007. Hence, it has been filed late by two years one day therefore suit is barred by the limitation by virtue of Section 2(j) of Schedule 3 and entries 75 and 76 of the Limitation Act as per which the prescribed period of a civil suit for defamation is one year. Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 3 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. (ii) That suit is hit by the provisions of Order 6 Rule 4 CPC which make it mandatory upon the plaintiff to produce material particulars and it was necessary for the plaintiff to prove that the objectionable statements were defamatory and were published and the plaintiff suffered acute damages. No particular has been furnished by the plaintiff as to the persons to whom the publication took place and the persons in whose appreciation, the plaintiff has suffered damages. (iii) That suit is hit by the provisions of Order 7 Rule 14 CPC which makes it obligatory upon the plaintiff to produce any document or material on the basis of which the plaintiff sues or relies upon and since the plaintiff has not produced the compact disc of the recording of the telecast dated 27.9.2004 or even the transcript of the alleged defamatory material, the suit is liable to be dismissed. On merits, the defendant No. 1 has denied that the defendant No. 1 is a TV channel and it is stated that the TV is a company under the Companies Act which owns and carried on the business in the name and style of Star News. Further, it is stated that the plaintiff has come to the court with an elaborated story but when no document or material particular has been provided by the plaintiff with regard to telecast made on 27.9.2004. The defendant has no recording of telecast at the present Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 4 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. juncture nor he is obliged to keep such record for an indefinitely long period. Issue of preservation of records by a television channel is regulated by norms prescribed by the up­linking guidelines issued by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting dated 2.12.2015 which make it obligatory for the television channel to keep record of the content uplinked by the channel for a period of 90 days and no longer and in any event beyond a period of one year. Hence, the defendant denied for want of knowledge that the telecast took place as alleged by the plaintiff. Thus, the defendant No. 1 has prayed for dismissal of the suit. 4. On the application of plaintiff under Order 1 Rule 10 (2) CPC vide order dated 3.4.2008 CEO, Star News was deleted as defendant no.1 and its place, Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. was added as defendant. 5. The plaintiff filed replication to the said written statement of defendant No. 1 in which he replied to the preliminary objection that the defamation refers to libel and slander i.e. the class of statements addressed to the eyes and ears. Certain types of defamation which are of hybrid type affect both eyes and ears. Hence, the limitation will of three years as it will be covered under Article 113 of the Limitation Act and not under entries 75 and 76 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act which prescribes the limitation of one years. With respect to objection that suit is hit by provision of Order 6 Rule (4) Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 5 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. CPC plaintiff stated that defamation was done by telecasting defamatory news due to which he suffered acute damages and he is not required to submit the deposition of the witnesses in the plaint. With respect to other preliminary objection of Order 7 Rule 14 CPC regarding non filing of compact disc, it is stated that the plaintiff has placed on record all material documents available with him and he is not possession of compact disc of broadcast. The compact disc of telecast ought to be with defendant. Hence case is not hit by provision of order 7 rule 14 CPC . On merits, the plaintiff has denied the contents of the written statement as wrong and incorrect and reiterated the contents of the plaint as correct. 6. The defendant No. 2 did not appear despite service through publication hence, he was proceeded ex­parte vide order dated 26.10.2010. 7. On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, Ld. Predecessor has framed following issues vide order dated 22.2.2011:­ 1. Whether the suit is barred by the period of limitation? OPD. 2. Whether the suit is bad for mis­joinder of defendant No. 1 as per preliminary objection No. 7 in the written statement of defendant No. 1? OPD1. 3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the decree of damages Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 6 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. as prayed for in the plaint? OPP. 4. Relief. 8. In order to prove his case, the plaintiff has examined 4 witnesses. He examined himself as PW1 and led his evidence by way of affidavit, Ex. PW1/A. He also examined Sh. Anil Kumar Chaturvedi as PW2, Sh. Anil Kumar Sharma as PW3 and Smt. Prabha Lamba as PW5. As far as PW4 is concerned my Ld. Predecessor in the ordersheet dated 19.2.2015 has recorded that there is no affidavit of PW4 on record hence, he was not examined. 9. On the other hand, defendant did not examine any witness. 10. Arguments were heard from Sh. Vinay Gupta, Ld. counsel for the plaintiff and Sh. Vivek Sharma, Ld. counsel for the defendants. I have considered the arguments and gone through the records. My issue­wise findings are as under :­ 11. ISSUE NO. 1. Whether the suit is barred by the period of limitation? OPD. Ld. counsel for the plaintiff has contended that since the defendant has committed the defamation by telecasting the news hence, it comes under both libel and slander and hence, it will be called hybrid defamation and since there is no limitation period provided for the hybrid defamation, it will be covered under the Article 113 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act in which period of limitation is three years and not one Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 7 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. year. In support of his contention, he has relied upon the Judgment of Noor Mohammad Vs. Md. Jiajddin , AIR 1992 MP 244. 12. On the other hand, Ld. counsel for the defendant has contended that the plaintiff has filed the present suit for recovery of damages on the basis of alleged defamation done by defendant No. 1 through telecasting of the news item on 27.9.2004 that the plaintiff has been dismissed from services due to some irregularities done by him in appointment of Patwaris while he submits that in the Limitation Act , there are two kind of defamations, one Libel and other is Slander and as per Entry Nos. 75 and 76 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act , the limitation period for both the libel and slander is one year whereas as the present suit has been filed on 28.9.2007 hence there is delay of 731 days and hence is liable to be dismissed being barred by limitation. He submits that the contention of the plaintiff that since the defamation was done by defendant through telecast which involve both libel and slander together as it is both published and heard hence, it is a hybrid defamation and therefore, limitation of three years is not tenable as there is no such concept of hybrid defamation. He submits that the Judgment relied upon by the plaintiff titled as Noor Mohammad Vs. Md. Jiajddin , AIR 1992 MP 244 is not applicable in the present suit as the said Judgment is about the hybrid action and not hybrid defamation. He submits that there is no such concept of hybrid defamation. Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 8 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. 13. I have considered the submissions and have gone through the record. As per the Entry No. 75 of Schedule to the Limitation Act , the period of limitation of filing a suit for libel is one year and similarly as per Entry No. 76, period of limitation for filing a suit for slander is also one year. As per dictionary, the libel is a written or printed defamation while slander is spoken defamation. Undoubtedly, As per deposition of plaintiff thorough his affidavit EXPW1/ A the news was telecasted on 27.09.2004 mentioning that he has been dismissed from service because of not following the rules laid down in the recruitment of patwari hence the news is telecasted along with the commentary of correspondent, hence it involve both written and printed defamation if the news is found untrure as same can be seen visually as well as heard at the same time. Therefore it will cover in both libel and slander. 14. Undoubtedly when the Limitation Act was passed in the year 1963, television industry was at the infant stage and there might be telecast for few hours on Doordarshan if any, hence, the law makers would not have thought that in future, the news will be telecasted over TV which could cause defamation against any person which would cover in libel and slander simultaneously. Therefore, they have not made any such category for defamation which involve both libel and slander. Hence I am agree with the contention that the defamation if any committed by the defendants same is done through hybrid medium that is which involve both libel and slander. Since there Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 9 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. is no entry in Limitation Act which provide limitation period for defamation covered simultaneously by written and spoken word simultaneously hence same would not covered in article 75 or 76 of schedule of Limitation Act hence it would fall in Article 113 of the said Act which deals with period of limitation not covered in other article of schedule. It provide limitation period of three year libel hence limitation period in present case would be three year and not one year For this, I found the Judgment relied upon by the plaintiff i.e. Noor Mohammad Vs. Md. Jiajddin , AIR 1992 MP 244 passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh Gwalior Bench. The facts of said case are that the marriage of one Ruksana was solemnized on 16.4.1976 with defendant No. 2 Sher Mohammad. During the marriage, some dispute took place between the bride and groom family over the payment of nautchgirl and defendant returned the Baraat leaving behind bride due to refusal of the plaintiff making the payment of said Nautchgirl. The plaintiff filed the suit for defamation for loss of reputation due to returning of Baraat. Thereafter, the defendant has taken the ground that the suit has been filed after a period of one year therefore, barred by limitation. On the other hand, the plaintiff has stated that since defamation was done by the plaintiff involve both visible defamation as well as spoken defamation hence, covered in residuary Article 113 and period of limitation is three years. The Hon'ble High Court decided the suit in favour of the plaintiff and held though since returning of Baraat Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 10 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. involves both eyes and ears therefore, it will be covered in residuary article hence, it is a hybrid action. The relevant portion of the Judgment is reproduced as under :­ "14. The next question to be examined is, if the decree for damages in the sum of Rs. 3,000/­, for defamation is sustainable in law. Appellant's counsel, Sh. Lahoti, contended seriously that the claim in that regard was time barred and pleaded Art. 76 , Limitation Act, 1963 , Sh. Kaushik, learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff­respondent, contended on the other hand, that the suit was governed by the residuary Art. 113 and that it was within times being filed within 3 years of the date of marriage. It cannot be disputed that Art. 76 applies to a tort of the specified category namely, "libel or slander". In my view, therefore, it has no application to plaintiff's suit as the tort complained is not of that category. Plaintiff's action is evidently not founded on any spoken or written words of defamatory nature. The gist of the action, in the instant case consists of act and conduct of the two defendants, the father and the son; the tort for which they are to be held liable is of a hybrid type". 15. From the aforesaid Judgment it is evident that Hon'ble High Court has held that those act of defamation which not covered in either libel or slender will not fall in article 75 or 76 of Limitation Act but will fall in Article 113. In my view though this Judgment is not on defamation done through the media of telecast but applicable to present case as it covered the cases where defamation was caused by the hybrid action. In this case Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 11 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. also the act of defendant causing defamation if any was hybrid as it cover both libel and slander at the same time hence would be covered in Article 113 of Limitation Act hence Limitation period would be three year. 16. In the present case alleged defamation has took place on 27.09.2004 and present suit has been file on 28.09.2007. While calculating period one day has be excluded i.e the day on which limitation start or the last day it ends hence if I exclude the 27.09.2004 as mandated u/s 12(1) of Limitation Act then period of limitation would commence from 28.09.2004 and would end on 27.09.2007, Present suit has been file on 28.09.2007 hence same has been file even beyond three year. It is not the case of defendant that 27.09.2007 Court was closed therefore same has been filed on 28.09.2007 hence with in limitation. In view of above I held that since suit has been file beyond the period of three year therefore same is barred by limitation. Hence Issue No. 1 is decided against the plaintiff. 17. ISSUE NO. 2 Whether the suit is bad for mis­joinder of defendant No. 1 as per preliminary objection No. 7 in the written statement of defendant No. 1? OPD1. The onus to prove this issue was upon the defendant. The defendant no.1 has taken the preliminary objection No. 7 that the suit is suffered from the defect of mis­joinder of party and non­joinder of necessary party. The plaintiff has wrongly Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 12 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. impleaded CEO Star News Delhi TV Channel as defendant No. 1 in the suit which is not a legal entity at all on one hand and failed to implead Media Content & Communications Services (India) Pvt. Lted on other hand. The defendant has taken the objection on the first date of hearing and vide order dated 3.4.2008 passed by the Ld. Predecessor, the application under Order 1 Rule 10 read with Section 151 CPC seeking impleadment in the matter filed by the plaintiff on 3.4.2008 was allowed while the defendant has now been substituted as defendant No. 1 in the suit. The plaintiff cannot be given a go by as to plaintiff obligations to proper impleadment of parties and therefore, the suit is liable to be dismissed on the ground of mis­joiner and non­joinder of parties. 18. It is the case of the plaintiff that defamatory news was telecasted in the Star News on 27.9.2004 therefore, the plaintiff has made the Star News as defendant No. 1. Order 1 Rule 9 CPC says that no suit shall be defeated by the reasons of mis­joinder and non­joinder of parties and the court may in every suit deal with the matter in controversy so far as regards the rights and interests of the parties actually before it. From this Section, it is apparent that even if a necessary party has not been joined by the plaintiff or plaintiff join a party which should not be joined as party, the suit should not be dismissed if the rights and interest of the parties are actually before the court. 19. In my view mentioning the name of star news a TV Channel as Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 13 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. defendant instead of the name of company which owned it is merely an error in the name of parties as usually a common man would not be able to differentiate between brand name and the name of the company who is owning said brand. When the defendant pointed out the mistake, the plaintiff has corrected the same by filing application u/0 1 rule 10 CPC . The ordersheet dated 13.2.2008 reflects that the counsel for the present defendant No. 1 appeared and submits that he will move appropriate application for correction of the name of defendant No. 1 as Star News is merely a name of channel and does not have any legal entity therefore, in the circumstances, my Ld. Predecessor had directed the plaintiff to take steps in this regard and direct defendant No. 2 to file the written statement. Thereafter, the plaintiff filed the application under Order 1 Rule 10 CPC for impleading present defendant No. 1 as party in place of Star News strucking of the name Star News as defendant No. 1 and adding name of the present defendant No. 1 Media Content & Communications Services (India) Pvt. Ltd. as defendant No. 1. The application has been allowed by the Ld. Predecessor vide order dated 3.4.2008 hence, in the circumstances, in my view, the objection of the defendant taken in the written statement that suit is bad for mis­ joinder and non­joinder of party is not tenable. If the defendant No. 1 was aggrieved with the said order dated 3.4.2008, the defendant No. 1 should have challenge the said order but the same has not been done hence, the said order has become final and Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 14 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. same cannot be challenged. 20. In view of above I held defendant has failed to proved that suit is liable to be dismissed on the ground of non­joinder and mis­joinder of parties. Hence, I decide the issue No. 2 in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant No. 1. 21. ISSUE NO. 3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the decree of damages as prayed for in the plaint? OPP. The onus to prove this issue was upon the plaintiff. The plaintiff, in order to prove his case, has examined himself as PW1. In his evidence through affidavit, Ex. PW1/A, he deposed that he is retired as IAS Officer and was working as Additional Secretary (Home), Government of Uttranchal and retired from services on 30.9.2004. On 27.9.2004, he was shocked to receive numerous calls from various persons including his friends, relatives, officers of State Government, Central Government, Acquaintances and even subordinates inquiring with respect to the news clipping telecasted by defendant No. 1 at Star News between 8.30 ­ 8.45 am on 27.9.2004 that he has been dismissed from services because of not following the laid down rules in the recruitment of Patwaris. The said news was false news and he came to know from other reliable sources that the said incorrect news had been telecasted deliberately at the saying, instigation and conspiring of some vested interest to make the deponent a Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 15 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. controversial person just three days prior to his retirement and to lower down his reputation in the eyes of his colleagues, superiors, subordinates, friends, relatives etc. He further deposed that during the course of his assignment of recruitment of Patwaris, he was being hard­pressed for recruitment of their respective candidates by high ranked politicians, bureaucrats, political parties, known leaders and since he discarded all the recommendations and adopted an impartial, fair and judicious approach and selected for training the best competitive and most deserving candidates, this provoked the anger, disgust and discontent of such persons and some of them conspired against him and got telecasted the said news with connivance of defendants. He further deposed that the news was false and is evident from the fact that he has retired honourarily from the services on superannuation. He further deposed that he had served the defendant with legal notice dated 1.3.2005 and upon receipt of said notice, the defendant had deputed some of his representatives who had been assuring the plaintiff that due justice will be done and told that they are conducting probe into the matter and if needed, they will telecast a detailed news specifying their regret and shall be presenting a right news as a corrigendum and they also promised to adequately compensate but to no effect. He further deposed that the defendant news channel is seen across the nation and many other countries and the most sensitive and serious inquiries were made from people at Delhi after telecast of news on 27.9.2004 causing Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 16 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. lowering his reputation. He further deposed that the defendant's notice was served on the CEO, Star News Channel on 3.3.2005 whereas the Ministry guidelines was dated 2.12.2005. Therefore, the defendant could have destroyed the record in March 2006 but because the deponent had already served the notice to the CEO, the recording should have been preserved by them. It shows a deliberate action for destruction of evidence which was entirely in defendant's custody. 22. In his cross examination, it is stated that when the controversial post was held, he was posted as District Magistrate at Rudra Prayag and Pauri Garhwal and were pertaining to interference from influential people who were trying to get their work done. In response to the question when the alleged telecast took place, he stated that it was on 27.9.2004 and in response to the question what was the time of said news, he stated that the same was mentioned in the plaint. Further, in response to the question, in span of 12 hours between 8.30 and 8.45 am, how many times the alleged telecast was made, he stated that he cannot say how many times it was made. In response to the question could he tell what is the language used in the alleged telecast, he stated that it was mentioned in the telecast that Mr. S.K. Lamba, District Magistrate of Pauri Garhwal, Uttrakhand has been dismissed from service in connection with some recruitment of patwaris. In addition to this, the reporter also had shown the videography of his office, name plate, table chair in his absence when he Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 17 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. was not sitting in the office. In response to the question had he heard the telecast himself, he stated that he did not. Most of the people have told him that while watching TV, they have heard the telecast. In response to the question who was the various persons mentioned in para 8 of the affidavit (person told him about the news) he stated that one is Sh. A.K. Chaturvedi and second is Sh. Anil Kumar Sharma and he did not remember the name of other persons. In response to the question can he give name of particular politician, bureaucrat etc he had claimed that they pressurized for recruitment of favoured candidates, he told that he had given the names of such persons in a letter given to the Chief Secretary, Uttrakhand Government at that time and he can produce the copy of the same. Thereafter, his cross examination was deferred for production of said letter and he produced the same as Ex. PW1/9. He admitted that he was placed under suspension for alleged irregularities in recruitment of patwaris but voluntarily stated that these allegations were not true and the disciplinary proceeding was started against him. He did not know the result of the said proceeding as no report was given to him by the inquiry officer. He denied that no such telecast was made and no such allegations were made in the telecast that he is guilty of committing irregularities in recruitment of Patwaris. He denied that the Government of Uttranchal did not pursue the matter further only because he had already retired from service. He stated that he was reinstated in service by virtue of orders passed by Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 18 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) and he did not recollect the date of CAT order. He denied the suggestion that he has concealed material information while imputing allegations of defamation. He denied the suggestion that the telecast does not affect his reputation. 23. The plaintiff has also examined Sh. Anil Kumar as PW2 who, in his evidence led through affidavit, Ex. PW2/A deposed that he is a regular watcher of TV news and other programs. In the morning of 27.9.2004 between 8.30 ­ 8.45 am, he was listening and watching Star News TV channel when he heard the name of plaintiff, an IAS officer of Uttrakhand has been dismissed from services by the Government for not following the laid down rules in the recruitment of Patwaris. Along with the news, his office room, name plate outside the office was also shown in the telecast. On the said date, he was serving in Delhi as Joint Director, (Legal), in the Ministry of Company Affairs, Government of India. He immediately rang up the plaintiff to check the background and correctness of the telecasted news. 24. In his cross examination, he deposed that he did not remember the date of telecast of the news mentioned in his affidavit however, it was done in September, 2004 and the date mentioned in his affidavit may be the correct date of telecast of news. He cannot say whether 27.4.2009 was on Monday. He stated that on that date, he was employed at Ministry of Company Affairs, Shastri Bhawan, Delhi. His official Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 19 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. hours were 9.00 am to 5.30 pm and he usually reached his office in time. That time he was residing in Sector­9, Rohini. He used to take metro rail for commuting from his residence to his office and it took almost one hour to 1.15 minutes to reach his office. 25. Plaintiff has also examined PW3 Sh. Anil Kumar Sharma. He also almost deposed on the same facts which is stated by PW2 in his affidavit except that on that date, he was working as Managing Director, Garhwal Mandal Vikas Nigam, Dehradun. In his cross examination, he stated that the news was telecasted on 27.9.2004 and fell on Monday. His office hours were 10.00 am to 6.00 pm. At that time, he had undergone angioplasty of the heart and used to leave from his residence to his office around 9.30 am to 9.45 am. The news was telecasted at 8.30 am and the duration of the telecast was 15 to 20 minutes. During said period, the news was telecasted 2­3 times. He heard the news only once. He did not have any mode to record the same. 26. Plaintiff also examined fourth witness Smt. Prabha Lamba, his wife as PW5 who has also deposed that on the morning of 27.9.2004, at about 8.30 ­ 8.45 am, she was watching TV and listening to the Star News TV channel. Suddenly, she heard the telecast that her husband has been dismissed from services. Soon she started receiving calls from friends etc. but since she had not knowledge about it, she immediately rang up her husband to know the facts and was told that there is nothing Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 20 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. like that and even he also did not know about it. Her husband told her that somebody must have joked. Her husband told her that he also had received few calls in this regard. In her cross examination, she stated that she saw the alleged telecast at Noida between 8.30 am or 9.00 am. She saw the telecast but she cannot say whether it was repeated or not. She stated that her husband is an early riser, keeps good health and has never undergone surgery. To her knowledge, there are no heart related issues to her. 27. On the other hand, the defendant has not examined any witness. 28. It is contended by the counsel for the plaintiff that from the testimony of plaintiffs' witnesses, it is proved that the defendant has telecasted fake news that the plaintiff has been dismissed from services whereas plaintiff has not been dismissed from services and has attained superannuation. Therefore, in view of false and fake news of plaintiff's dismissal, reputation of the plaintiff was lowered in the eyes of his friends, juniors, seniors, relatives etc. Hence, the defendant is liable to compensate him. 29. On the other hand, counsel for the defendant has argued that though the onus was upon the plaintiff to prove that the telecast was made but plaintiff has not produced any document / CD of the said telecast nor has produced transcript of the same. Therefore, plaintiff has failed to prove that the defendant has telecasted any Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 21 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. defamatory news against the plaintiff. He further contended that if any defamation was caused by the defendant, the plaintiff should have approached the defendant immediately for preservation of the CD but the plaintiff did not approached to the defendant admittedly for almost more than five months as first legal notice intimating the defendant about the alleged false news was made on 1.3.2005 which clearly shows that the plaintiff's reputation was not lowered even if the said news was telecasted. 30. He also contended that all the witnesses which the plaintiff has examined in support of his testimony are the only witnesses as they are his friends or his wife and thus are interested witnesses. Hence, their testimony cannot be relied upon. 31. He further contended that plaintiff in the cross examination has admitted that he has been suspended by the Government and inquiry was conducted regarding recruitment of Patwaris hence, even if it is presumed that the news was telecasted same was done in good faith, probably the word used were not dismissal from service, but might be regarding his suspension. He submits that being press / news channel, it is the duty of the defendant to make the public aware of any such incident. He submits that it is admitted by the plaintiff that the defendant has no enmity with the plaintiff so there was no reason for the defendant to telecast the fake news and if any news was Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 22 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. telecasted, same was telecasted bonafidely in public interest. Hence, in these circumstances, no defamation was done by the defendant hence the suit of the plaintiff is liable to be dismissed. 32. I have considered the submissions and have gone through the case file. Before analyzing the testimony of witnesses it would be appropriate to discuss what is defamation. 33. Defamation has been defined under Section 499 IPC which is reproduced as under :­ "Defamation.­­­Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1.­­It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.­­It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.­­An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.­­No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 23 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful". 34. In my view, if the defendant No. 1 has telecasted the false news of dismissal of plaintiff from service on the ground of alleged irregularities in the requirement of Patwari in its news channel malafidely, it would amount to defamation. 35. The defendant in the written statement has averred that since they do not have the news clipping therefore they are unable to tell whether any such news was telecasted or not. I am fully agree with the contention of the counsel for the defendant that the onus was upon the plaintiff to prove that the defendant has telecasted the said news. The best way to proved the said fact was to produced the alleged news clipping but same has not been produced. I do not find any force in the contention of the counsel for the plaintiff that since the news clipping was in the possession of the defendant therefore, the same should have been produced by the defendant. As stated above the defendant in the written statement has taken the defense for non production of said news clipping that as per guidelines of the Ministry of Broadcast, Government of India, the news is to be preserved for 90 days only. Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 24 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. Though said guidelines have not been produced by the defendant nor any evidence was led by the defendant but merely on this ground burden does not shift upon the defendant to proved the news clipping. 36. Further, if the plaintiff has been aggrieved with the telecast of any news which according to him was defamatory, then the plaintiff should have approached at the earliest to the defendant for securing the said news clipping / CD but the plaintiff first time has written legal notice on 1.3.2005 to the defendant i.e. after almost five months of the telecast. No reason has been explained by the plaintiff why for five months he has not taken any action against the defendants or intimating them about correct facts that he has not been dismissed from services so that the defendant could make / telecast correct news and probably apology of channel also so that his reputation could be restored. Hence, in my view, the defendants cannot be at fault if they have not preserve the news clipping and destroy the same prior to receiving of notice of plaintiff. I am fully agree with the contention of Ld. Counsel for defendant that It is very difficult for a news channel of 24 X 7 to keep track of all the news telecasted for a period of 5 months. in my view, the best way to take any action against a TV channel for telecasting wrong news is to approach immediately after telecast with the specific request to not to destroy the clipping so that the same can be used if a party affected by the news telecasted want to take any action but as stated above, it is the Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 25 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. plaintiff who has made considerable delay of five months in sending legal notice to the defendant. Therefore, he has to suffer. Hence I do not find force in the contention of Ld. Counsel for the plaintiff that since defendant has not produced the news clipping therefore presumption is to drawn that news has been telecasted. 37. Now coming to the testimony of plaintiff. As far as testimony of plaintiff/ PW1 is concerned, it is admitted case of plaintiff that he has himself not seen the news dated 27.9.2004 hence his testimony is hearsay to that extent and thus cannot be relied upon to proved that defendant has telecasted the alleged defamatory news. 38. As far as PW2 is concerned, PW2 in his examination in chief has stated that he has seen the news on 27.9.2004 between 8.30 am to 8.45 am telecasted at Star News TV about dismissal of the plaintiff but in the cross examination, he admitted that he did not remember the date of telecast of the news mentioned in the affidavit. It is very unlikely and unbelievable that on one hand he has remembered the date of telecast as 27.9.2004 the event which has taken place 10 years ago but on the other hand, he even do not remember which date of telecast he has mentioned in the affidavit which was prepared on five days before his cross examination. This create doubt that he would have told the date of telecast of alleged defamatory news to the counsel who prepared his evidence affidavit otherwise he would have remember the date of telecast at the time of his cross examination also. Further PW2 has stated that Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 26 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. on 27.9.2004, he was employed in the Ministry of Company Affairs, Shastri Bhawan and his office hours were 9.00 am to 5.00 pm and he was residing at Sector­9, Rohini and it took 1­1.15 minutes to reach his office. In these circumstances, in my view, the PW2 cannot see the news which was allegedly telecasted from 8.30 to 8.45 am as in that case, he would not have reach his office at 9.00 am and would have been at the best either in his office or commuting in the metro rail as alleged by him. It is not the case of that he has heard the news in the metro or on the way from his house to his office or at his office. I do not find his testimony reliable that on 27.9.2004, he has seen the news on Television regarding dismissal of plaintiff from service. 39. As far as testimony of PW3 is concerned, though PW3 has deposed in his affidavit that he has seen the news but in his cross examination, he has stated that he used to leave for his office at about 9.30 ­ 9.45 am. He deposed in his affidavit that after watching the news, he made call to the plaintiff but plaintiff in the pliant, has not specifically mentioned the name that on 27.9.2004, any call was made by PW3 informing him about telecast of news and has only made general pleading that he was received numerous calls from his friends etc. As stated above, as contended by the counsel for the defendant that as the PW3 is friend of the plaintiff hence, it cannot be ruled out that he might have given the testimony in favour of the plaintiff under the influence of the plaintiff. Hence, I do not find the testimony of PW3 reliable. Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 27 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. 40. PW5 Smt. Prabha Lamba has also deposed that she has seen the news. In her cross examination, she has stated that after hearing news, she has talked to her husband at 7.00 ­ 7.30 am. In her affidavit, she has stated that after hearing news she has rang to her husband to know facts and husband told that there is nothing like that but in her cross examination, she stated that she had spoken to her husband at 7.00 ­ 7.30 am which means that she had not talked to her husband after hearing news. Even the plaintiff in his plaint or in his affidavit has not deposed that his wife has made any call to him after hearing the news. In these circumstances, the testimony of PW5 also does not appear to be reliable 41. I am agree with the contention of Ld. Counsel for the defendant that the plaintiff has not mention specifically name of PW2 to PW5 who have made any call to him after hearing the news either in the plaint or in his examination in chief. It is not the case of plaintiff that he was not aware of the name of PW2 or PW3 hence he could mention their name in the plaint as the person who informed him about the alleged defamatory news. Atleast he could say in the plaint that his wife has told him about the telecast of alleged defamatory news but in the plaint he has neither mention the name of PW2 and PW3 nor stated that his wife, PW5 watched the alleged news and has only made general averment that he received numerous call from his friends, relatives, officer of state govt,. central govt, acquaintances and even subordinates about the Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 28 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. telecast of news of his dismissal from service. Therefore In the circumstances, in the absence of alleged news clipping it would be proper to rely upon the testimony of PW2,PW3 and PW5. In view of the above discussion, I held that the plaintiff has failed to prove that defendant has telecasted any news regarding dismissal of the plaintiff. 42. Further, I am also agree with the contention of the counsel for the defendant that since the plaintiff has admitted that he has been suspended from the services regarding recruitment of Patwaris and inquiry was initiated against him, it cannot be ruled out that if any news was telecasted on 27.9.2004 at 8.30­8.45 am with regard to the suspension of plaintiff and not dismissal and the same would be verified only after seeing the news or further, if news was regarding dismissal of the plaintiff and it cannot be ruled out that the defendant might have done bonafidely as they done on the basis of information received from their sources. If the news has been telecasted wrongly mentioning that plaintiff has been dismissed from service instead of suspended, the plaintiff could approach the defendant and they could published the correct news and even apology so that if any harm to the reputation to the affected party is done, the same could be restored but the plaintiff did not take any action immediately despite coming to know about the telecast of news on the same day nor did contacted Star News immediately and waited for 5 months for sending legal notice which create doubt that due to telecast of news, he actually suffered loss of reputation Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 29 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. and same is an afterthought. 43. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, I held that the plaintiff has failed to prove that the defendant has committed any defamation against the plaintiff. 44. RELIEF. In view of my findings in issue Nos. 1 and 3, I held that the plaintiff is not entitled to any relief. I dismiss the present suit with costs. Decree sheet be prepared accordingly. File be consigned to record room after necessary compliance. Announced in the open court (Sanjeev Kumar­I) on 28.08.2018 Additional District Judge­12, Central Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi 28.08.2018 Digitally signed by SANJEEV SANJEEV KUMAR KUMAR Date: 2018.08.28 16:06:15 +0000 Suit No. 14058/16 Page No. 30 of 30 S.K. Lamba Vs. Media Content & Communications Services Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.