T. Sunkappa S/O Late Husenappa vs B. Janardhan S/O Smt. B. Thippanna on 25 November, 2020 Author: Pradeep Singh Yerur Bench: Pradeep Singh Yerur 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA DHARWAD BENCH DATED THIS THE 25 T H DAY OF NOVEMBER 2020 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP SINGH YERUR CRL.RP.NO.2292 OF 2011 BETWEEN T.SUNKAPPA S/O LATE HUSENAPPA, AGED: 60 YEARS, OCC: CONTRACTOR R/O: NAGAlkERE, RAMNAGAR, TQ & DIST: BELLARY ... PETITIONER (BY SRI C.S. SHETTAR, ADVOCATE FOR SRI G.K.HIREGOUDAR, ADVOCATE) AND 1. B.JANARDHAN, S/O B.TIPPANNA AGED: 39 YEARS, OCC: PRIVATE SERVICE, R/O: BEHIND SUBBA RAO HOSPITAL, D. NO.5, W. NO.32, RAMNAGAR, CONTONMENT BELLARY. 2. GALLI SOMASHEKAR REDDY, S/O LATE CHANGA REDDY, AGED: 42 YEARS, 2 MLA BELLARY CITY, R/O: HAVAMBAVI, BELLARY 3. VIDYADHAR D.BAIKERIKAR, S/O NOT KNOWN TO PETITIONER, AGED: 42 YEARS, WORKING AS CPI, COWL BAZAAR POLICE STATION, BELLARY 4. STATE OF KARNATAKA BY BELLARY POLICE, REPRESENTED BY STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR, HIGH COURT BUILDING, DHARWAD. ... RESPONDENTS (BY SRI B.C.JNANAYYA SWAMY, ADV. FOR R1, SRI J. BASAVARAJ, ADV. FOR R2 AND R3, SRI RAMESH B.CHIGARI, HCGP FOR R4) *** THIS CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION IS FILED U/S 397 R/W 401 OF CR.P.C. SEEKING TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT AND SENTENCE 30.08.2011 PASSED BY THE ADDL. SESSIONS COURT, BELLARY IN PC NO.07/2008 AND ALLOW COMPLAINT FILED BY THE PETITIONER AND DIRECT TO CONSIDER THE CASE ON MERITS. THIS PETITION COMING ON FOR DICTATING ORDERS THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING: 3 ORDER This revision petition is preferred by the Complainant aggrieved by the order passed in P.C. No.07/2008 by the Addl. Sessions Judge, Bellary dated 30.08.2011, wherein the complaint filed by petitioner herein came to be dismissed under Section 203 of Cr.P.C. 2. Parties herein shall be referred to as per their status before the trial Court for the sake of conveinience. 3. Brief facts leading to this case are as under: It is the case of the complainant that he is a reputed person in Bellary City belonging to 'Chaluvadi Caste', which is recognized as Scheduled Caste Community. He has a wife and two sons and is working as a Contractor. Wife of the complainant had filed OS No.263/2008 before the I Addl. Civil 4 Judge (Jr. Dvn.), Bellary for the relief of declaration about the immovable property encroached by accused No.1 along with his brother, by name, Nagaraj, who is driver of MLA and also a Minister. 4. On 02.12.2008 at about 11.00am accused No.2 along with his supporters and bodyguards came near the house of the Complainant and called him. Thereafter, accused No.2 abused the Complainant in filthy language for filing a case against accused No.1 and his brother. Despite complainant explaining to accused No.2 that his wife had filed a civil case against accused No.1 and his brother as they had encroached the property, accused No.2 abused complainant and his family members. It is further stated that two followers of accused man handled complainant and his two sons and that accused No.2 went to the extent of directing his followers to shoot complainant. Accordingly, followers of accused No.2 threatened complainant that they would kill him. 5 5. It is further case of complainant that accused No.1 abused him in filthy language by using caste name of complainant, namely, 'Chaluvadi Sulemagane ninnannu mugisthini'. It is further stated that accused No.1 threatened complainant that if the civil suit is not withdrawn he would kill complainant and his family members. Thereafter, accused No.2 immediately called Cowl Bazar Police and Complainant and his two sons were forcibly taken and kept in Police custody and in the evening they were produced before the learned Magistrate. Complainant and his two sons were falsely implicated in Cr. No.180/2008 for the offences punishable under Sections 323, 307, 354, 504, 506, 448 r/w 34 of IPC . 6. It is further case of Complainant that accused No.3, who is Police Inspector, registered a said case under the pressure of accused No.2 despite Complainant filing a case against the 6 accused persons, the same was not accepted by accused No.3. Subsequently, Complainant was released on bail on 16.12.2008 and immediately Complainant filed a complaint against the accused persons for the offences punishable under Section 323 , 504 , 167 , 506(2) , 499 of IPC and Sections 3(1)(v) , 3(1)(viii) , 3(1)(x) , 3(1)(ix) , 3(2)(1) , 3(2)(vii) of SC & ST Act r/w 34 of IPC , which is registered as PC No.7/2008 on 05.12.2008. 7. On registration of the said private complaint, trial Court referred the matter under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. After investigation, Police filed a B report, based on which notice was ordered to the Complainant and protest petition was filed by Complainant. Trial Court rejected the said B final report and posted the case for sworn statement of the Complainant and his witnesses. 8. Thereafter, to prove the case Complainant got himself examined along with three other 7 witnesses. After considering on the sworn statement and the material placed on record, trial Court rejected the complaint under Section 203 of Cr.P.C. vide its order dated 30.08.2011, which is impugned herein. 9. Heard Sri C.S.Shetter, on behalf of Sri G.K.Hiregoudar, learned counsel for petitioner / Complainant, Sri B.C.Jnanayya Swamy, learned counsel for respondent No.1, Sri J.Basavaraj, learned counsel for respondents No.2 and 3 and Sri Ramesh B.Chigari, learned High Court Government Pleader for respondent No.4 - State. 10. It is contended by the learned counsel for Complainant that the impugned order passed by the learned Magistrate is contrary to the facts and material evidence on record and hence the same is liable to be set aside. He contends that the tria l Court has committed a serious error in rejecting the complaint without going through the materials 8 placed on record, which has resulted in mis-carriage of justice. Learned counsel further contended that the trial Court has failed to appreciate the sworn statement of the Complainant and his witnesses and corroboration of the same by each other, which is natural and credit worthy. Non acceptance of the said statement placed on record by the Complainant is illegal and arbitrary. Learned counsel further contends that the trial Court was right in rejecting the B report submitted by the Police. Pursuant to which despite recording sworn statement of the Complainant and other witnesses and sufficient materials, the learned Magistrate rejected the same without properly appreciating the complaint, sworn statement and evidence of other witnesses. Therefore, passing of the impugned order is a mechanical in nature and hence the same deserves to be set aside. 9 11. Learned counsel further contends that the trial Court had committed serious error in not appreciating the provisions of Section 3(1)(x) of SC & ST Act, wherein it ought to have noticed that injuries is not a criteria, but it is the intention of the accused which ought to have been looked into by the trial Court and rejecting the complaint at pre-trial stage is erroneous in law and the same deserves to be reversed. 12. Learned counsel further contends that the accused persons using their political power and muscle power have forcibly taken the Complainant and his sons in a jeep, assaulted them in public and abused them in filthy language calling their caste name. 13. Learned counsel further contends that while rejecting the complaint under Section 203 of Cr.P.C., the Court below has to decide only whether there is prima facie offence as alleged by 10 Complainant is made out and not to decide whether there is any possibility of prima facie conviction. He contends that the entire process and the procedure adopted by the trial Court is illegal and there is absolutely no application of mind by the learned Magistrate in rejecting the complaint and consequently acquitting the accused. Therefore, he contends that the order passed by the trial Court is illegal, perverse and unsustainable in law as well as on facts and circumstance of the present case. 14. Learned counsel for Complainant placed reliance on the following decisions in support of his arguments: ( 1) CHANDRA DEO SINGH vs PRAKASH CHANDRA BOSE ALIAS CHABI BOSE AND ANOTHER reported in AIR 1963 SC 1430; ( 2) BALRAJ KHANNA AND OTHERS vs MOTI RAM reported in AIR 1971 SC 1389. 11 15. Per contra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 - accused No.1 contends that the order passed by the trial Court is based on materials placed on record and on consideration of the sworn statement recorded. Trial Court has appreciated the entire material before Court and rightly come to a conclusion that there is no ground made out by the Complainant to proceed with trial in the matter. He further contends that the Complainant has initiated a false and frivolous complaint only with an intention of malice and to wreak vengeance against accused persons. Learned counsel further contends that the trial Court has provided fair opportunity by rejecting the B report filed by Investigating Officer and pursuant to recording the sworn statement of the Complainant and after considering the material evidence and other materials placed, has found that there is no material to proceed against the accused. Therefore, when there is no material on record merely because 12 the complaint is filed invoking certain provisions, it is not necessary for the trial Court to frame charges. He further contends that the trial Court has rightly exercised its power under Section 203 Cr.P.C. to reject the complaint when there is no prima face case is made out against the accused persons. 16. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No.2 and 3 vehemently contends that accused No.2 herein is a Sitting MLA of Bellary and accused No.3 is none other than the Police Inspector of Cowl Bazar Police Station, Bellary. He further contends that both the accused No.2 and 3 are public servants and his primary objection and defence is that the Complainant has not obtained permission / sanction to prosecute respondents No.2 and 3 as contemplated under the Code. 17. He further contends that complaint initiated by the Complainant emanates out of a criminal case, wherein Complainant was charged for 13 the offences punishable under Sections 323, 307, 354, 504, 506, 448 r/w 34 of IPC . It is further contended that for the aforesaid offences Complainant came to be arrested on 16.12.2008 in Cr. No.7/2008 and thereafter he was remanded to judicial custody along with his two sons. Learned counsel further contends that when they were presented before the learned Magistrate they have not made any complaint of harassment or torture by the jurisdictional police or taken the names of these accused persons for having falsely implicated the Complainant and his two sons. 18. Learned counsel further contends that even on bare reading of the complaint averments nothing is very specifically stated with regard to abusive words uttered by accused No.2. It is also contended by the learned counsel that there is no serious allegation, or for that matter any allegations against accused No.3 in the complaint except stating 14 that accused No.3 registered a false case under pressure of accused No.2. He further contends that it is not the case of the Complainant that accused No.3 was present in spot during the incident. 19. He further contends that the Complainant along with his two sons when arrested and remanded to judicial custody have not claimed or stated about any ill-treatment before the learned Magistrate. In the present case, they cannot now lie that they were harassed and tortured by the accused persons. Learned counsel further contends that accused were released on bail on 16.12.2008 and the present complaint is filed on 27.12.2008 after a period of 11 days. He contends that it is an after thought by the Complainant to file the present complaint only with an intention of malice and to wreck vengeance against the accused Nos.2 and 3 knowingfully well that accused No.2 is a sitting MLA and accused No.3 is a Police Officer. 15 20. Learned counsel further contends that Complainant had the knowledge with regard to the status of both the accused and there being no sanction obtained for prosecution, the entire complaint is liable to be dismissed at the initiation itself, as the same is not maintainable. Further, not obtaining of permission / sanction to prosecute accused Nos.2 and 3 as required under Section 197 of Cr.P.C. in the present case, is fatal to this case. Learned counsel further contends that averments made even in complaint do not prima facie make out offences against the accused persons. 21. Learned counsel further contends that the matter was referred by the learned Magistrate to the jurisdictional Police, which was carefully investigated by the police have thereafter filed a B report. Trial Court accepting the contentions of the Complainant provided fair and reasonable opportunity to the Complainant to substantiate his case, which has not 16 been done by the Complainant and accordingly, trial Court has rightfully rejected the complaint under Section 203 Cr.P.C. 22. It is further contended by the learned counsel for accused Nos.2 and 3 that the trial Court is well within its power to go through the contents of the complaint, conduct an inquiry and obtain necessary evidence of witness on oath and thereafter come to a conclusion that there is a prima facie case made out to proceed with and issue process and bring charges there under and in case the learned Magistrate gives an opinion after examining the statement of witnesses and considering the inquiry of investigation that there is no sufficient ground to proceed further he has every right to dismiss the complaint. 23. The learned counsel contends that in the present case the trial Court has examined all these aspects provided sufficient reasonable opportunity to 17 Complainant and has satisfied itself with regard to prima facie case not being made out and hence rejected and dismissed the complaint. He further contends that there is no illegality and perversity in the order of the trial Court and hence he seeks for dismissal of the petition. 24. Learned Government Pleader contended on behalf of the respondent No.4 - State, that after conducting investigation by the Police they have filed B report and submitted the same before the Court, pursuant to which, role of State is limited, but nevertheless he contends that prosecution as against accused Nos.2 and 3 requires sanction in view of the fact that both of them are public servants. He also contends that the order passed by the trial Court is sustainable in law and on the facts and circumstance of the case. 18 25. Having heard the learned counsel for petitioner and learned counsel for respondents, the point that arise for consideration before this Court is: "(1) Whether the trial Court is within its power to dismiss the complaint when there is no prima facie case made out to proceed further? (2) Whether there is any illegality or perversity in the orders passed by the trial Court?" 26. To answer the above points, at the cost of repetition, it would be necessary to have a cursory look at facts of the case. Wife of complainant had filed a plaint in OS No.263/2008 on the file of I Addl. Civil Judge (Jr. Dvn.), Bellary for the relief of declaration about the immovable property encroached by the one Janardhan/ accused No.1 along with his brother, by name, Nagaraj. It is the case of complainant that on 02.12.2008 at about 11.00 a.m., accused No.2 along with supporters and bodyguards came near the house of complainant, 19 abused in filthy language as complainant has filed a civil case against accused No.1 and that the followers of accused No.2 manhandled two sons of complainant, went to the extent of directing the followers to shoot them dead who threatened the complainant that they will kill him and that accused No.1 used filthy abusive language taking the name of caste of complainant. 27. The allegation made by complainant against the accused is that they abused in filthy language taking the name of caste of complainant. But, on perusal of the complaint, there is no such allegations made as against accused No.2 and accused No.3. It is the case of complainant that the accused Nos.1 and 2 have threatened with dire consequences and followers of accused No.2 threatened to kill the complainant. Based on the statements made in the complaint, the trial Court referred the matter for investigation under Section 20 156(3) of Code of Criminal Procedure. After completion of investigation, 'B' report came to be submitted to the trial Court. Thereafter, the protest memo came to be filed by complainant and even in the protest memo there is no allegation against accused Nos.2 and 3. After the protest petition was filed, trial Court afforded reasonable and fair opportunity to lead his sworn statement and place all material in support of the case. 28. Accordingly, sworn statements were recorded. On the basis of said sworn statements and the materials placed on record, trial Court considered the matter as to whether sufficient prima facie case is made out to proceed against the accused to issue notice against the accused. On consideration of the material placed on record and sworn statements and the investigation report of the prosecution, trial Court has came to a conclusion that there was consistencies in the sworn statements 21 made by the complainant and the witnesses and that there was no ground to proceed against the accused for the offence alleged therein and accordingly, dismissed the complaint under Section 203 of Code of Criminal Procedure. 29. In view of this, let us have a look at Section 203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which reads as under: "Dismissal of complaint- If, after considering the statements on oath (if any) of the complainant and of the witnesses and the result of the inquiry or investigation (if any) under section 202, the Magistrate is of opinion that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss the complaint, and in every such case he shall briefly record his reasons for so doing." 30. Bare reading of Section 203 states that if, the Magistrate is of the opinion on consideration of statements on oath of complainant and witnesses 22 and on the result of the enquiry of investigating agency, there is no sufficient ground for proceeding, he shall dismiss the complaint. 31. In the present case on hand initially the Investigating Agency has filed 'B' summery report. On the protest Petition being filed by the complainant, 'B' summery report was rejected and opportunity was provided to complainant to record sworn statements and produce any material in support of his case. Complainant and three other witnesses PW1 to PW.4 were examined and their sworn statements were recorded. After careful perusal of these sworn statements, trial Court came to a conclusion that no case is made out to proceed against the accused for the alleged offence. The provisions of Section 203 of Cr.P.C. states that if the Magistrate is of the opinion that if there are sufficient grounds for proceeding, he shall dismiss the complaint. 23 32. The word 'sufficient grounds' used under Section 203 of Cr.P.C. has to be construed to mean the satisfaction that a prima facie case is made out against the accused and sufficient grounds for the purpose of conviction. Section 203 consists of two parts. First part being the materials placed before the Court, which the Magistrate must consider and the second part is after consideration of those materials if there is no sufficient grounds for proceeding in the opinion of Court, then it may dismiss the complaint. Therefore, the understanding is whether the allegations made in the complaint and the statement of witnesses recorded in support of the same if taken at their face value make out absolutely no case against the accused. The complaint also does not discloses essential requirements of the offence which is alleged against the accused. Under such circumstances, the Court is within it's powers to reject and dismiss the complaint. 24 33. In the present case, learned Sessions Judge has considered all these aspects and has arrived at the conclusion that no prima facie case is made out to proceed against the accused. In the case relied by learned counsel for the petitioner, the ratio laid down is that where there is prima facie case made out, the committing Magistrate is duty bound to commit the accused for trial and it has to be left to be decided at appropriate stage and issue of process cannot be refused. 34. In the second case also, it is held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that the object of provisions of Section 202 of Code of Criminal Procedure is to enable the Magistrate to forma an opinion as to whether process should be issued or not at that stage. What the Magistrate has to see is whether there is any evidence in support of the allegations made in the complaint and nowhere evidence is sufficient to warrant a conviction, which is reiterated 25 in the case of Balraj Khanna and others Vs. Moti Ram stated supra. After extracting the ratio in the case of Chandra Deo stated supra, this legal aspect of the matter is not in dispute. But in the facts of the present case, it is the contention of learned counsel for the accused that there is no material on record and no allegations have been made against accused to attract the offence charged therein. 35. In fact, in the case of Mrs.Priyanka Srivastava and another vs. state of u.p and others in Criminal Appeal No.781/2012 relied by the learned counsel for accused-respondent, it is stated in para Nos.26 and 27 as below: "26. At this stage it is seemly to state that power under Section 156(3) warrants application of judicial mind. A court of law is involved. It is not the police taking steps at the stage of Section 154 of the code. A litigant at his own whim cannot invoke the authority of the Magistrate. A principled and really grieved citizen with clean hands must have free access 26 to invoke the said power. It protects the citizens but when pervert litigations takes this route to harass their fellows citizens, efforts are to be made to scuttle and curb the same. 27. In our considered opinion, a stage has come in this country where Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. applications are to be supported by an affidavit duly sworn by the applicant who seeks the invocation of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate. That apart, in an appropriate case, the learned Magistrate would be well advised to verify the truth and also can verify the veracity of the allegations. This affidavit can make the applicant more responsible. We are compelled to say so as such kind of applications are being filed in a routine manner without taking any responsibility whatsoever only to harass certain persons. That apart, it becomes more disturbing and alarming when one tries to pick up people who are passing orders under a statutory provision which can be challenged under the framework of said Act or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. But it cannot be done to take undue advantage in a criminal court as if somebody is determined to settle the scores. We have already indicated that there has to be prior 27 applications under Section 154(1) and 154(3) while filing a petition under Section 156(3). Both the aspects should be clearly spelt out in the application and necessary documents to that effect shall be filed. The warrant for giving a direction that an the application under Section 156(3) be supported by an affidavit so that the person making the application should be conscious and also endeavour to see that no false affidavit is made. It is because once an affidavit is found to be false, he will be liable for prosecution in accordance with law. This will deter him to casually invoke the authority of the Magistrate under Section 156(3). That apart, we have already stated that the veracity of the same can also be verified by the learned Magistrate, regard being had to the nature of allegations of the case. We are compelled to say so as a number of cases pertaining to fiscal sphere, matrimonial dispute/family disputes, commercial offences, medical negligence cases, corruption cases and the cases where there is abnormal delay/latches in initiating criminal prosecution, as are illustrated in Lalita Kumari are being filed. That apart, the learned 28 Magistrate would also be aware of the delay in lodging of the FIR." 36. Reliance is also placed by learned counsel for accused in the case of B. Chandrika vs. Santhosh and another reported in (2014) 13 SCC 699 wherein, Hon'ble Apex Court has held at para 10 as below: "The Magistrate has to exercise judicial discretion and apply his mind to the contents of the petition. The refer report as well as the statement of the complainant would indicate that no offence has been made out so far as the second accused is concerned since, admittedly, no money was entrusted to her and that second accused is the divorced wife of the first accused. That being the factual situation, we are inclined to allow the appeal so far as the second accused is concerned and the summons issued against the second accused would stand quashed. However, it is open to the Magistrate to proceed against the first accused." 29 37. Under the above said circumstances, when a complaint is filed, it is necessary and mandatory for the trial Court Judge to apply his mind before issuance of process and taking cognizance of the matter and the same cannot be done in a mechanical manner merely on filing of the complaint by complainant. Therefore, at the stage of issuing process and taking cognizance, the Court should be circumspect and judicious in exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and circumstances into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be a instrument in the hands of private complaint as Vendetta to harass the persons needlessly. Vindication of Majesty of justice and maintenance of law and order in the society are the prime object of criminal justice system and criminal jurisprudence. But, it would not be the means to wreak personal vengeance. Therefore, it is essential that before issuing the process, the trial Court has to essentially keep in mind the scheme contained in 30 the provisions of Sections 200 to 203 of Code of Criminal Procedure, keeping in mind the position of law and pass order judiciously and not in a mechanical routine manner. 38. In the present case on hand, admittedly, private complaint registered by complainant is 10 days after he has been released from judicial custody i.e. on 27.12.2008. It is not in dispute that complainant was arrested and sent to judicial custody on the complaint of accused No.1. Nothing prevented the complainant from registering the case immediately as on date of the incident either by himself or through other family members. The delay in filing the complaint does not instill confidence in the mind of this Court. It is essential in Criminal prosecution that when there is a wrong committed to an individual, the same has to be reported immediately for taking legal action. Delay in approaching the Court as stated above, is fatal in 31 this case. The powers of this Court under Section 203 of Cr.P.C. is to see that an individual should be discouraged from filing criminal case without there being prima facie case and after prolonged delay. It is also essential that allowing a vexatious and belated prosecution would amounts to abuse of process of law which cannot be allowed. 39. In the present case, the trial Court has provided sufficient fair opportunity to complainant and after considering the material evidence placed on record held that there is no prima facie case made out to the satisfaction of the Court to issue process and proceed in the matter. Therefore, I answer point No.1 in the affirmative. The trial Court is well within it's powers to dismiss and reject a complaint, if there is no prima facie case made out to issue process and proceed in the matter. 40. In view of the above point No.2 is answered in the negative as there is no illegality or 32 perversity committed by the trial Court in dismissing the complaint. Accordingly, I pass the following: ORDER Petition is dismissed. No costs. Sd/- JUDGE VK HMB