N.Hiriyan vs B.Sivakumar on 9 September, 2014 Author: S. Tamilvanan Bench: S.Tamilvanan IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS DATED : 09.09.2014 CORAM THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.TAMILVANAN S.A. No.23 of 2008 and M.P.No.1 of 2008 N.Hiriyan ... Appellant vs B.Sivakumar ... Respondent Appeal is filed under Section 100 of the Civil Procedure Code against the judgment and decree dated 21.08.2007 made in A.S.No.80 of 2006 on the file of the Sub-Court, Udhagamandalam, confirming the judgment and decree dated 29.09.2006 made in O.S.No.124 of 2004 on the file of the District Munsif, Kothagiri. For Appellant : Mr. R.Subramanian For Respondent : Mr. I.C.Vasudevan JUDGMENT The second appeal has been preferred challenging the Judgment and Decree dated 21.08.2007 made in A.S.No.80 of 2006 on the file of the Sub-Court, Udhagamandalam, confirming the Judgment and Decree dated 29.09.2006 made in O.S.No.124 of 2004 on the file of the District Munsif, Kothagiri. 2. The unsuccessful plaintiff before the trial court is the appellant herein. The suit was filed by the appellant / plaintiff, before the trial court, seeking damages to the tune of Rs.25,000/- from the respondent / defendant with costs, on the ground that the defendant had sent a petition to the District Collector, Nilgris, containing false and defamatory averments. 3. The appellant / plaintiff has stated in the plaint that he was serving as Village Administrative Officer (VAO) of Konavakorai village, as a post-graduate, having sufficient means and reputation in the village. The village to which he belongs is the revenue village of Naduhatty and there are many Revenue villages within the territory of Kaigar at Pedthala of Nilgris District. 4. According to the appellant / plaintiff, the respondent / defendant had migrated from Kalinganatty village to Byangi village few years prior to the filing of the suit and the defendant's father had been in Government service. However, for reasons best known to him, the respondent herein had sent petition, making false allegations against the appellant with a view to tarnish the image of the appellant before the authorities, with the malafide intention, to the District Collector, Nilgris with a copy to the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu against the appellant without any justification or excuse. The appellant has stated that the said petition contained derogatory and defamatory averments and the respondent herein, Knowing fully well that the petition would be opened and read by many officials and be circulated to other officers to ascertain whether the allegations are true or otherwise. According to the appellant, the petition contained malicious and defamatory words against the appellant / plaintiff. The officers, authorised to hold enquiry on the petition, enquired many villagers and ascertained about the allegation made in the petition on 03.10.2001 against the appellant / plaintiff. 5. It was further stated in the plaint that for no fault of him, the plaintiff had to suffer severe mental agony for many days and the villagers started suspecting the credentials of the appellant. The authorities concerned, having conducted enquiry, sent a report to the District Collector with the allegation made in the petition, dated 03.10.2001, as false and baseless. The Tahsildar, Kothagiri, who made enquiries on the allegations has stated that the defendant, who is the author of the said petition did not come forward to speak about the petition, in spite of opportunity being given to him. 6. According to the appellant, the attitude of the respondent / defendant would show that the petition was sent with an ulterior motive of damaging the reputation of the appellant / plaintiff. The appellant has further stated that he has already filed a private complaint under Sections 499 and 500 IPC r/w Section 200 Cr.P.C before the Judicial Magistrate, Kothagiri in C.M.P.No.2737 of 2003 against the respondent / defendant. With the above pleadings, the appellant herein filed the suit, relating to this second appeal, seeking damages to the tune of Rs.25,000/- from the respondent / defendant. 7. The respondent / defendant filed his written statement, disputing the averments made against him in the plaint and stated that there was no defamatory statement made by him, as stated in the plaint. the respondent / defendant has stated that there was no defamatory statement made in his petition, however, he has admitted that the petition was sent by him to the District Collector, Nilgris and enquiry was conducted by the Revenue Divisional Officer,Coonoor with regard to the proceeding in Na. Ka. Ah. No. 12880/2001 and in the enquiry, according to the respondent, the appellant was orally warned by the RDO, stating that the appellant was taking law into his own hands and if he continue the same, he would be suspended. Since the matter is pending before the appropriate authority, the appellant is not entitled to file the suit, based on the earlier report sent by the Tahsildar. Hence, according to the respondent, the suit was liable to be dismissed, as not maintainable. 8. After the trial, the suit was dismissed with costs by the trial court. The appellant herein was also directed to pay exemplary cost of Rs.2,500/-, as per Section 35 A of the Code of Civil Procedure. Aggrieved by which, the respondent / plaintiff herein preferred an appeal before the Sub-Court, Udhagamandalam. Having gone through the Judgment and Decree passed by the trial court, the evidence available on record and the arguments advanced by both sides, the first appellate court, confirming the Judgment and Decree passed by the trial court, dismissed the appeal with costs. Aggrieved by which, this second appeal has been preferred. 9. The second appeal has been admitted on the following substantial questions of law : "(1) Whether in law are not the Judgment and Decree of the courts below vitiated as they have failed to understand the difference between defamation and malicious prosecution ? (2) Have not the courts below overlooked that in a suit for damages for defamation, the plaint should only allege the publication of defamatory statement and they were published with a view to defame the plaintiff ? (3) Have not the courts below erred in dismissing the suit as premature overlooking that the enquiry before a Collector has no nexus to the suit for damages ? (4) Have not the courts below erred in awarding exemplary costs without understanding the scope of Section 35A CPC ?" 10. Substantial Questions of Law 1 and 2 : The appellant has raised the first substantial question of law on the ground that defamation is different from malicious prosecution, however, the Courts below have not understood the difference between defamation and malicious prosecution. In the pliant, the appellant / plaintiff has stated that the respondent / defendant had sent a petition with false and defamatory allegation to the District Collector, Nilgris against the appellant / plaintiff, to tarnish the image of the plaintiff, in the eye of general public and the fellow officials of the appellant / plaintiff. 11. It is an admitted fact that the respondent herein had sent a petition against the appellant / plaintiff, to the District Collector, Nilgris, since the appellant / plaintiff was working as VAO, under the District Collector, Nilgris. The learned counsel for the respondent / defendant submits that the genuineness of the complaint could be decided only by the concerned authority, namely, the District Collector, Nilgris, hence, before the disposal of the petition by the Authority, the appellant / plaintiff was not entitled to file a suit, seeking damages on the ground that the said petition / complaint was containing false and defamatory statements. 12. Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the complaint sent by the respondent herein against the appellant is defamatory in nature, however, the Courts below have not considered the same properly, even without knowing the difference between defamation and malicious prosecution, the Courts below have dismissed the suit. On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent submitted that there was no malafide intention on the part of the respondent, while sending the petition to the District Collector, Nilgris and the District Collector is the competent authority to take appropriate action against the appellant, being a Village Administrative Officer, hence, the petition sent by the respondent / defendant could not be construed as a defamatory statement. 13. The appellant / plaintiff has stated in the plaint that already he had filed a private complaint under Sections 499 and 500 IPC read with Section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure before the Judicial Magistrate, Kothagiri. However, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent / defendant that the alleged private complaint was already dismissed by the concerned Court and the same reached its finality. 14. As per Ramanatha Iyers Law Lexicon, II Edition, 2007, Defamation is a false publication, calculated to bring one in disrepute; an intentional false communication, either published or publicly spoken, that injures anothers reputation, scorn or contempt in a respectable and considerable part of the community, which may be criminal as well as civil, which includes both libel and slander. 15. In Blacks Law Dictionary, referring Mcgowen v. Prentice, La.App. 341 S.23 55 , 57 , it has been defined that Defamation is that which tends to injure reputation; to diminish the esteem, respect, goodwill or confidence in which the plaintiff has held, or to excite adverse, derogatory or unpleasant feelings or opinions against him and statement, which exposes person to contempt, hatred, ridicule or obloquy. 16. As per Purshottam v. Prem Shanker , reported in AIR 1966 All 377, Defamation in law includes Criminal and Civil, in considering its scope, as per Articles 19 (2) and 21 of the Constitution. 17. Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code ( IPC ) gives the definition for defamation, which reads as follows : Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. 18. As per Section 499 IPC, whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, knowingly or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of the other person, that would come under the purview of defamation and exceptions are also stipulated therein. As per first exception to Section 499 IPC, imputation of truth or statement made or published for public good cannot be construed as defamation. It is not in dispute that Section 500 IPC deals with punishment for committing an offence of defamation. 19. It is an admitted fact that the petition, dated 03.10.2001 had been sent by the respondent herein to the District Collector, Nilgris at Udhagamandalam, wherein the respondent has raised certain allegations against the appellant herein. It has been averred in the plaint that as per the petition, dated 03.10.2001 sent by the respondent / defendant to the District Collector, Nilgris, there were certain defamatory allegations against the appellant / plaintiff and a copy of the same was also sent to the Tahsildar, Kothagiri. In the copy of the complaint, dated 03.10.2001, the respondent herein had stated that he was a member in a particular political party and one Devaraj, s/. Madian Biyangi was contesting in the panchayat election of the village, as a candidate of the other political party. 20. The appellant / plaintiff, N.Hiriyan, s/o. Nanja Gowder Biyangi, though he was the VAO of the village, spent money and keeping the village people under his control and was paying Rs.25,000/- as loan to various employees and also conducting unauthorised village panchayat on sundays and on other Government holidays in the village. Accordingly, on 02.10.2001, during Gandhi Jayanthi day, he conducted a panchayat and put certain conditions to the village people, whereby instructed the village people not to have relationship with certain families, who were condemned in the earlier meeting of the panchayat and they should not be permitted to enter into the committee hall and that milk, provisions and other essentials should not be given to the said 5 families. If anybody comes for canvassing for the election, the village people should not speak with them and anybody violates the aforesaid condition, a fine of Rs.1,101.25/- would be imposed on them and thus the village people were prevented by the appellant, in order to support a candidate of a particular political party in the Election. 21. The appellant / plaintiff has raised a substantial question of law that the Courts below have not understood the difference between defamation and malicious prosecution, though the petition was sent by the respondent / defendant herein to the District Collector, Nilgris, raising certain false and defamatory allegations against the appellant / plaintiff. As per the cause of action, alleged in the plaint, the appellant / plaintiff has stated that the defendant had sent the petition with false and defamatory allegations against the appellant herein. The supporting documents filed by the appellant before the trial Court were (1) Notarised copy of the petition, dated 03.10.2001 sent by the defendant to the District Collector, Nilgris; and (2) Notarised copy of the enquiry report of the Tahsildar, Kothagiri, dated 03.05.2002. 22. A perusal of the copy of the petition, dated 03.10.2001 shows that the respondent herein alleged that the appellant had convened village panchayat and made certain instructions to the villagers in the panchayat that they should not have any dealings with certain families and also certain other allegations stating that the appellant had sold a land, measuring 60' x 30' in S.No.912 of the village in public auction for Rs.500/- and appropriated Rs.35,000/- and also collected Rs.1000/- each from the villagers for the purpose of constructing water tank and the total amount collected was Rs.7,000/- for which there was no account given by the appellant. When the petition had been addressed by the respondent / defendant to the District Collector, against the appellant / plaintiff, an employee working under the said authority, it cannot be construed as a defamatory statement before the same is decided by the said authority. 23. It is an admitted fact that the suit was not filed based on the findings of the District Collector, Nilgris, as false or defamatory by the authority, to whome the petition was addressed. It is well settled that to be a defamatory statement, it need not necessarily be a publication, however, the burden is upon the plaintiff, being the dominus litus to establish that the statement was false and defamatory in nature. Merely because the District Collector, Nilgris, directed the Tahsildar, Kothagiri, to conduct an enquiry pursuant to the petition being received by him, it could not be construed that the petition had been sent by the respondent / defendant could be a defamatory statement. It is clear that the appellant / plaintiff has raised an unreasonable plea that the courts below have failed to understand the difference between defamation and malicious prosecution. Admittedly, the petition was addressed to the competent authority, raising certain allegations against the appellant, who was an employee under the authority, hence, before the enquiry and finding, the petition addressed by the respondent / defendant cannot be construed as a defamatory statement. On a perusal of the Judgments rendered by the Courts below, it is clear that there could be no presumption that the Courts below have not understood the difference between defamation and malicious prosecution. In fact, it is an unreasonable wild allegation raised against the Courts below in the form of substantial question of law. Hence, this Court is of the view to answer the substantial questions of law 1 and 2 against the appellant / plaintiff and in favour of the respondent / defendant, holding that there is no error or infirmity in the findings of the Courts below, in understanding and deciding the legal concept of defamation and malicious prosecution, on the facts and circumstances of the case. 24. Substantial Question of Law 3 : Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submitted that the Courts below have erred in dismissing the suit as premature, overlooking that the enquiry before the District Collector, has no nexus to the suit for damages. It is well settled that no statement could be defamatory, if it is based on truth. Had there been false statement, degrading the image of any person before the public, that could be construed as a defamatory statement. The cause of action alleged in the plaint relating to the suit is based on the averments contained in the petition given by the respondent / defendant to the District Collector, Nilgris against the appellant / plaintiff. Had the averments of the petition been based on facts, which cannot be construed as defamatory statement to maintain the suit, seeking damages. 25. On the said circumstances, the appellant cannot say that filing of the suit, seeking damages has no nexus, with the enquiry on the petition given by the respondent / defendant and the enquiry ordered by the District Collector. Only based on the petition given by the respondent / defendant to the District Collector, the suit was filed stating that it contains false and defamatory versions against the appellant / plaintiff. Hence, before the enquiry and finding of the concerned authority, namely the District Collector, merely on the petition, the appellant / plaintiff cannot say that the said petition is with false averments, defamatory in nature. It is argued by the learned counsel for the appellant / plaintiff that the suit could not have been dismissed, on the ground that the same was premature. The suit is admittedly based on the petition sent by the respondent / defendant to the District Collector, Nilgris against the appellant / plaintiff, who was a VAO, serving under the District Collector. The alleged cause of action was also relating to the said petition sent by the respondent / defendant. Hence, before the decision being taken by the Authority, the appellant / plaintiff cannot say that the petition was sent with false and defamatory allegations, he is entitled to seek damages from the respondent. Hence, the third substantial question of law is also answered against the appellant / plaintiff and in favour of the respondent / defendant. 26. Substantial Question of Law 4 : The fourth substantial question of law raised in the second appeal is regarding the compensatory costs awarded by the trial Court under Section 35A of the Code of Civil Procedure, that was confirmed by the appellate court. It is well settled that under Section 35A CPC, the Court can impose compensatory costs on the plaintiff or the defendant, when there is vexatious claim made by a party to the suit. 27. In the instant case, it is an admitted fact that the appellant / plaintiff was working as VAO under the District Collector, Nilgris and the respondent / defendant sent a petition to the District Collector, raising certain allegations against the appellant / plaintiff. It cannot be disputed that the District Collector is the competent authority to deal with the petition sent against the appellant, being a V.A.O under the Authority. The appellant cannot dispute the authority of the District Collector, in passing an order for verifying the genuineness of the petition by conducting enquiry through Tahsildar or any other competent officer, subordinate to him, which cannot be disputed by the appellant / plaintiff, directly or indirectly by filing the suit. On such circumstances, it would be the endeavour of the appellant / plaintiff to raise his defence before the concerned authority or the enquiry officer and plead that it was a petition sent with false and defamatory averments against him. Had the decision or the finding of the authority is that the respondent / defendant had given a false or defamatory complaint against the appellant / plaintiff, it would be open to the appellant / plaintiff to maintain a suit, seeking damages for sending such a petition containing false and defamatory statement. After receiving the petition, the District Collector had referred the matter to the Tahsildar, Kothagiri for conducting enquiry. On the said circumstances, the appellant / plaintiff cannot rush to the Court, seeking damages from the respondent / defendant at the premature stage, as found by the Courts below. 28. The scope of Section 35 and 35A of the Code of Civil Procedure has been considered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Salem Advocates Bar Association v. Union of India , ( 2005) 6 SCC 344 and Ashok Kumar Mittal v. Ram Kumar Gupta & Anr , ( 2009) 2 SCC 656 and Vinod Seth v. Devender Bajaj & Anr , (2010) 8 SCC 1. 29. In Salem Advocates Bar Association v. Union of India reported in (2005) 6 SCC 344, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as follows : "Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that many unscrupulous parties take advantage of the fact that either the costs are not awarded or nominal costs are awarded on the unsuccessful party. Unfortunately, it has become a practice to direct parties to bear their own costs. In large number of cases, such an order is passed despite Section 35(2) of the Code. Such a practice also encourages filing of frivolous suits. It also leads to taking up of frivolous defences. Further wherever costs are awarded, ordinarily the same are not realistic and are nominal. When Section 35(2) provides for cost to follow the event, it is implicit that the costs have to be those which are reasonably incurred by a successful party except in those cases where the Court in its discretion may direct otherwise by recording reasons thereof. The costs have to be actual reasonable costs including the cost of the time spent by the successful party, the transportation and lodging, if any, or any other incidental cost besides the payment of the court fee, lawyer's fee, typing and other cost in relation to the litigation. It is for the High Courts to examine these aspects and wherever necessary make requisite rules, regulations or practice direction so as to provide appropriate guidelines for the subordinate courts to follow." 30. In Ashok Kumar Mittal v. Ram Kumar Gupta & Anr , reported in (2009) 2 SCC 656, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held thus: "One view has been that the provisions of Sections 35 and 35A CPC do not in any way affect the wide discretion vested in by High Court in exercise of its inherent power to award costs in the interests of justice in appropriate civil cases. The more sound view however is that though award of costs is within the discretion of the court, it is subject to such conditions and limitations as may be prescribed and subject to the provisions of any law for the time being in force; and where the issue is governed and regulated by Sections 35 and 35A of the Code, there is no question of exercising inherent power contrary to the specific provisions of the Code. Further, the provisions of Section 35A seems to suggest that even where a suit or litigation is vexatious, the outer limit of exemplary costs that can be awarded in addition to regular costs, shall not exceed Rs. 3000/-. It is also to be noted that huge costs of the order of Rs. Fifty thousand or Rs. One lakh, are normally awarded only in writ proceedings and public interest litigations, and not in civil litigation to which Sections 35 and 35A are applicable. The principles and practices relating to levy of costs in administrative law matters cannot be imported mechanically in relation to civil litigation governed by the Code." 31. In Vinod Seth v. Devender Bajaj & Anr , reported in (2010) 8 SCC 1, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows : "23. The provision for costs is intended to achieve the following goals : (a) It should act as a deterrent to vexatious, frivolous and speculative litigations or defences. The spectre of being made liable to pay actual costs should be such, as to make every litigant think twice before putting forth a vexatious, frivolous or speculative claim or defence. (b) Costs should ensure that the provisions of the Code, Evidence Act and other laws governing procedure are scrupulously and strictly complied with and that parties do not adopt delaying tactics or mislead the court. (c) Costs should provide adequate indemnity to the successful litigant for the expenditure incurred by him for the litigation. This necessitates the award of actual costs of litigation as contrasted from nominal or fixed or unrealistic costs. (d) The provision for costs should be an incentive for each litigant to adopt alternative dispute resolution (ADR) processes and arrive at a settlement before the trial commences in most of the cases. 32. It has been made clear by the Hon'ble Apex Court that compensatory cost could be imposed under Section 35A of the Code of Civil Procedure, to make a deterrent effect against filing of vexatious, frivolous and speculative litigations. It is the discretion of the Court to decree a suit or dismiss the same with costs or without costs, however, it depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. Awarding costs should ensure that the provisions of the Code, Evidence Act and other laws governing procedure are scrupulously and strictly complied with and that the parties do not adopt delaying tactics or mislead the court. Similarly, the court should provide adequate indemnity to the successful litigant for the expenditure incurred by him towards the litigation. It was also held in the decision in Vinod Seth v. Devender Bajaj and Anr., (Referred to above) that provisions relating to the compensatory cost (Section 35 A of the Code) in respect of false or vexatious claims or defence has become virtually infructuous or ineffective, on account of inflation. Under the said section, awarding of compensatory cost, in case of false and vexatious litigation was subject to a ceiling of Rs.3,000/-. However, it was made clear that the same requires a realistic revision keeping in view, the observations in Salem Advocates Bar Association (Supra). It is also relevant to consider that lack of appropriate provisions relating to costs has resulted in a steady increase in malicious, vexatious, false, frivolous and speculative suits, apart from increase in docket explosion, making the object of Section 89 of the Code ineffective. As held by the Hon'ble Apex Court, any attempt to reduce the pendency or encourage Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) processes or to streamline the civil justice system will fail, in the absence of not using the appropriate provisions relating to costs, as the same should discourage maintaining false and vexatious litigations. 33. In the instant case, it is an admitted fact that the respondent had sent a petition to the District Collector, Nilgris, against the appellant / plaintiff, as he was working as V.A.O in the District. Having considered the petition, the District Collector, referred the matter to the Tahsildar, Kothagiri, for conducting an enquiry. It is seen that the appellant / plaintiff, even without waiting for the result or finding of the District Collector, his Superior Authority, in deciding the petition, has rushed to the District Munsif Court, Kothagiri, by way of filing the suit seeking damages. Had the averments of the petition sent by the respondent / defendant been false and defamatory in nature, the appellant / plaintiff could have filed the suit, seeking damages or any other appropriate remedy, based on the finding of the District Collector. However, at the premature stage, the appellant / plaintiff had approached the trial Court, so as to make a defence before the authority, that the matter has been seized by a Civil Court, on the ground that the appellant / plaintiff was seeking damages from the respondent / defendant. Hence, on the facts and circumstances, it cannot be held that the suit was filed by the appellant / plaintiff with bonafide intention, as held by the Courts below. 34. There is no cause of action for filing the suit, seeking damages, before the District Collector, Nilgris, the Authority deciding the petition given by the respondent / defendant to the said Authority. Even as per Article 19 (1) of the Constitution, freedom of speech and expression has been guaranteed as a Fundamental Right, though a defamatory statement could not be construed as a right, within the meaning of freedom of speech and expression, in view of Article 19 (2) of the Constitution. 35. It cannot be disputed that a mere petition given by one person against another, could not be construed as defamatory statement, if it is based on the fact or truth. On the said circumstances, based on the averments made in the petition given by the respondent / defendant against the appellant / plaintiff to the District Collector, the averments could not be construed as a false and defamatory statement, based on which, the appellant / plaintiff would not be entitled to file the suit, seeking damages before the trial court. It was argued by the learned counsel for the respondent / defendant that the suit was filed at the premature stage, without any bonafide intention. When the suit has been filed at the premature stage, without a legally sustainable cause of action to maintain the suit, the Court can dismiss the suit with compensatory cost, as per Section 35 A of the Code of Civil Procedure, on the ground that the suit is based on false and vexatious claim. 36. After the trial, it was held by the District Munsif Court, Kothagiri that the appellant / plaintiff has not established his claim and further, the suit itself was filed at the premature stage, hence, the suit was dismissed with compensatory cost of Rs.2,500/-, as contemplated under Section 35 A of the Code of Civil Procedure. On appeal, the Sub-Court, Uthagamandalam, confirming the Judgment and Decree of the trial court, dismissed the appeal with costs. 37. Having gone through the substantial questions of law raised by the appellant / plaintiff, the concurrent findings of the Judgments rendered by the Courts below, based on the evidence available on record, all the substantial questions of law raised in this second appeal have been answered against the appellant / plaintiff, hence, the Second Appeal is liable to be dismissed. S. TAMILVANAN,J. tsvn In the result, this Second Appeal is dismissed. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is also dismissed. However, there is no order as to costs in this second appeal. 09-09-2014 Index : Yes Internet : Yes tsvn To 1. The Subordinate Court Udhagamandalam 2. The District Munsif Court Kothagiri. Judgment in S.A. No.23 of 2008