(I)1983 Crl. J. 1694 St. Of Himachal ... vs . Thakur Dass Etc. on 28 September, 2007 1 IN THE COURT OF SH. SANDEEP YADAV : M.M. DELHI C.C. 78/1 PS. SUBZI MANDI U/s. 500 IPC SURESH JINDAL VS. ARCHANA AGGARWAL JUDGEMENT 1. SL. NO. OF THE CASE 78/1. 2. DATE OF INSTITUTION 29.08.2001 3. NAME OF COMPLAINANT SURESH JINDAL, S/O. Lt. SH.SHEO NARAIN, R/O. E-20/142, SECTOR 3, ROHINI, DELHI. 4. NAME AND ADDRESS OF ACCUSED ARCHANA AGGARWAL, W/O. SH. SURESH JINDAL, D/O. SH. LAKSHMI CHAND AGGARWAL, R/O. C- 11/37, SECTOR 3, ROHINI, DELHI . 5. OFFENCE COMPLAINED OF U/s. 500 IPC 6. PLEA OF ACCUSED PLEADED NOT GUILTY. 7. DATE OF FINAL ARGUMENTS 23.08.07 8. FINAL ORDER ACQUITTED. 9. DATE OF JUDGMENT/ORDER 28.09.07 BRIEF STATEMENT OF THE REASONS FOR THE JUDGEMENT: 1. Complainant Suresh Jindal has filed the present complaint on his behalf as well on the behalf of his mother Smt. Ram Dai. The application u/s. 191 Cr.PC for permission to file and prosecute the present complaint on behalf of Smt. Ram Dai, mother of complainant against the accused was allowed by this Court vide order dt. 08.01.02. The case of complainant succinctly stated is as under: 2. Complainant was married with accused on 20.06.95. Subsequently 2 matrimonial disputes arose between the parties and they stated living separately. Thereafter, two petitions u/s. 18 of Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act (hereinafter referred to as " the Act") on behalf of accused on as well as on the behalf of her son Master Ashutosh were filed by the accused. In the aforesaid petition u/s. 18 of the Act, accused made certain averments in para 10,11,12 and 14. Complainant contends that he, his mother and his family member have been defamed by the imputations made by the accused in para 10,11,12 and 14 of the aforesaid petition. According to the complainant all these averments/contentions in the aforesaid para's are false and amount to character assassination of complainant and his family members. 3. Against this factual background, complainant seeks prosecution of the accused u/s. 500 IPC. Complainant sought to prove that allegation made by the accused in the aforesaid petition are false on various grounds mentioned in the complaint. It is stated in the complaint that aforesaid allegations cannot be believed as there is no custom of chaderandaji in the State of Haryana and particularly in the community to which complainant belongs. It is also stated that there is no property in the name of deceased brother of complainant Sh. Ram Bhagat except one LIC policy. It is stated that complainant cannot acquire any share in the said LIC policy and it was only Smt. Nirmala wife of deceased Ram Bhagat being the nominee 3 who can make legitimate claim to the said LIC policy. It is also stated that complainant is a highly educated person and she very well knows that a legally wedded person can not contract second marriage during the subsistence of his first marriage. 4. After filing of present complaint, pre summoning evidence was led. Complainant Suresh Jindal and Ram Dai along with CW 3 Lekh Raj were examined as complainant witnesses. Accused was summoned for the offence u/s. 500 IPC vide order dt. 08.01.02. Thereafter, accusation u/s. 251 Cr.PC was explained to the accused to the effect that accused has defamed the complainant by making remarks in her petition u/s. 18 of the Act. Complainant was asked to lead evidence. Complainant examined himself as PW 1. Cross examination of PW 1 was completed on 24.03.07. On 24.03.07 accused made a statement that she will be closing her right to cross examine other complainant witnesses if pre summoning evidence given by those witnesses is accepted by the complainant as after notice complainant evidence. Complainant adopted the pre summoning evidence of CW 1 Ram Dai and PW 3 Lekh Raj as after notice complainant evidence and accused chose not to cross examine those witnesses. Statements of both the parties in this regard were recorded. Statement of accused u/s. 281 Cr.PC was also recorded. Accused denied all the incriminating evidence against her. Accused stated that her Counsel in the 4 maintenance petition told her that it is legally necessary to explain all the atrocities and cruelties in the maintenance petition. However, no defence witness was examined. 5. I have heard the Ld. Counsel for complainant as well as the accused at length. Both the parties have also filed written arguments. Section 500 IPC provides punishment for defamation. Defamation is defined u/s. 499 Cr.PC as " Section 499 IPC defines defamation as under: " Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person." Explanation 1 - It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm that reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hartful to the feelings of his family or other near relative. Explanation 2 - It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of 5 persons as such. Explanation 3 - An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4 - No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 6. Complainant relied upon the following judgments: (i)1983 Crl. J. 1694 St. of Himachal Pradesh Vs. Thakur Dass Etc . (ii) 1961 Calcutta 359 - A.F.G Carapiet Vs. F.F.O.D. (iii) (1981) Delhi Law Times 390 Vinod Kumar & Ors. Vs. State. (iv) 1978 Crl J 764 S.M. Vikal Vs. A.L. Chopra (v) 1979 Crl. J. 766 Inder Singh Vs. Delhi Administration 1997 (I) CC Cases 172 (HC) Kuldeep Singh Vs. Sandeep Kaur. Accused relied upon the following judgments : 1. Gopi R Mallya Vs. Smt. Pushpa 1997 (4) Crl. 454. 2. Rajender Kumar Sita Ram Pandey Vs. Uttam - AIR 1999 SC 6 1028. 3. A.K. Jain Vs. State of Sikkim 1992 Crl. J. 842. 4. Smt. Nagawira Vs. Veerannna -AIR 1976 SC 1947. 5. Purshottam Lal Sayal Vs. Prem Shanker - AIR 1966 All. 377 6. Surinder Mohal Vikal Vs. Ascharaj Lal - 1978 Crl.J. 764 (SC) 7. V (2006) SLT 475 Indian Oil Corporation Vs. NEPC India Ltd . 7. PW 1 Suresh Jindal inter alia deposed that his marriage with the accused had taken place on 20.06.95 according to Hindu rights. Accused never lived at the native place of PW 1 and separated on 04.12.00. After the separation, accused filed two suits, one in her own name and second in the name of her son Master Ashutosh in the Court of Sh. S.S. Handa, Ld. ADJ, which is now pending in the Court of Sh. S.K. Sarvaria, Ld. ADJ. In both these cases accused claimed Rs. 4,000/- for her and Rs. 4,000/- for her child. Accused made false and defamatory allegations in the said suits. PW 1 proved the certified copies of petition Ex. PW1/A. PW 1 further deposed that although the whole petition is false and defamatory allegations have been made therein but he specifically referred to para 10,11,12 and 14 of the petition. PW 1 further deposed that accused alleged that complainant wanted to marry a girl staying at Safido Mandi, 7 Haryana. Accused further alleged that complainant and his family members wanted to carry his Bhabhi who is widow as his second wife. PW 1 referred to the allegation of the complainant that he and his family members including his Jija namely Lekh Raj tried to blackmail the accused. PW 1 went on to depose that all the allegations are wrong and defamatory and that there is no custom of chaderandaji in his community. PW 1 further deposed that he treated his bhabhi as his mother and the allegation have been made by the accused to defame the holy relation of dever and bhabhi. PW 1 denied all the allegations of accused in rest of his testimony. PW 1 finally deposed in examination in chief that accused not only made allegations in the Court but also circulated the same amongst his friends and relatives and because of those allegations, complainant has been downgraded in the eyes of other and people stopped inviting him and his mother in social functions. CW 1 also deposed that accused portrayed them as greedy person which is not correct. PW 1 was cross examined at length by the accused. In his cross examination PW 1 deposed that till the death of Ram Bhagat his wife Nirmala was issue less. PW 1 again deposed that Ram Bhagat was having Tractor Spare Parts Shop at Village Lakhan Majra, Distt. Rohtak, Haryana. It has also come in cross examination of PW 1 that Nirmala wife of Ram Bhagat was the nominee in his LIC policy and the value of policy 8 was Rs. 50,000/-. PW 1 also stated in his cross examination that after the death of Ram Bhagat his nominee was contesting the partition suit with his uncle. PW 1 further deposed that the said case was filed by his uncle, his cousin family and his family including his brother Ram Bhagat. PW 1 also admitted in his cross examination that initially Nirmala was not having right in property which was the subject matter of the aforesaid suit but subsequently as a part of compromise she was given 1/8 share in the property at village Chidhi which was sold for Rs. 1,05,000/-. PW 1 also deposed in cross examination that after the death of his elder brother Ram Bhagat, his wife and the mother of complainant were his legal heirs. 8. CW 1 Ram Dai in his examination in chief deposed that about five years ago his son Suresh Jindal got married with accused Archana Aggarwal according to Hindu rites and ceremonies. CW 1 further deposed that there was no question regarding the second marriage of his son Suresh Jindal with any other girl. CW 1 also deposed that there is no custom in their community for marriage by Shader Andazi. CW 1 further deposed that she was pained to hear about the allegations which was told to her by his son on filing of the petition by the accused. 9. CW 3 Lekh Raj is the brother-in-law of complainant. CW 3 deposed that the marriage of complainant had taken place in the year 1995 and after the marriage, accused did not adjust with the complainant and 9 accused did not like his visit or stay in the complainant house in Delhi. CW 1 further deposed that there was no talk whatsoever of marriage of widow of Late Ram Bhagat with the complainant. CW 3 further deposed that he was pained to hear from the complainant that the accused has made allegations in her maintenance petition about CW 3 himself and about his wife which are absolutely false and intended to defame him and his family members. 10. I have gone through the certified copy of petition u/s. 18 of the Act filed by the accused before Ld. ADJ, particularly para 10,11,12,13 and 14. which are being reproduced as under: Para 10 - "That as and when the petitioner objected to the indifferent behaviour being meted out to her, the fact revealed that the sisters of the respondent Smt. Premo and Smt. Indro used to instigate the respondent to create awkward situation for the petitioner and the respondent used to reach home at about 11-12 pm and the poor petitioner had to sleep without having good food and as and when she used to ask him about the food, he refused to have the food on one pretext or the other that he had his dinner in his office or with his party. The petitioner tried to ascertain cause of such indifferent behaviour and the fact revealed that mother and sisters of the respondent wanted to perform the marriage of the respondent with another girl at Safidon Mandi, Haryana, which could 10 not be finalised owing to refusal by the respondent and it is on account of said reason, the brothers in law of respondent Sh. Lekh Raj and Sh. Roshan Lal were instrumental in disturbing the peace of the family." Para 11 - "That the petitoner was passing her days in a vain hope that with the passage of time the better senses would prevail upon the respondent and it was on 16.01.97, the respondent did not turn up for the whole night from his office and even did not care to inform the petitioner on phone or otherwise and the next day the petitioner enquired from the office of respondent and the fact revealed that the elder brother of the respondent Mr. Ram Bhagat was admitted in Rohtak Medical Hospital and the respondent had gone straight to Rohtak and in the evening the respondent came back at home and took his mother along and it was on 24th January, the petitioner was informed that Sh. Ram Bhagat has expired and in order to console the grieving family, as required from a Hindu devoted wife, the petitioner visited her in laws house at Village Chiri, Haryana, and after 2-3 days of the death of Sh. Ram Bhagat the entire family of the respondent including his sisters, brother in laws, mother started compelling the respondent to keep the widow St. Nirmala w/o. Sh. Ram Bhagat as his second wife otherwise they will have to part with the share of Mr. Ram Bhagat in the properties, LIC policies etc. to Smt. 11 Nirmala which was sufficient to disturb the tranquility of the petitioner and it was on 13th day of ceremony of the departed soul when the entire family was collected for the occasion, the sisters of the respondent and their husbands proposed to keep Nirmala as second wife of the respondent which was objected to by the parents of Smt. Nirmala and they took her along." Para 12 - "That after few days when the respondent again visited Haryana at the native village for Monthly Shradh, the entire family of the respondent started abusing the petitioner and her father and brother and she was given severe beatings by her sister-in-laws Munni & Indro on the pretext that the petitioner was instrumental for the refusal by Nirmala to live as second wife of the respondent and the petitioner had no other option to leave the place along with the minor son and reached Delhi and took shelter with her parents." Para 13 - "That after two months, the petitioner received a call from Sh. Lekh Raj to join the matrimonial home at Jullana and accordingly the petitioner along with her brother visited the matrimonial home and upon reaching there mother of the respondent extended threates to the brother of the petitioner with dire consequences and accordingly brother of the petitioner came back to Delhi with heavy heart and even at that time the 12 petitioner developed complications and had high running fever, vomiting etc., and even at that time, no medical assistance was provided to her. The petitioner persuaded her mother in law with reference to small baby in her lap being fed by her and to avoid complications, and requested that she should be provided medical assistance, and upon hearing this, mother of respondent teleponed Sh. Lekh Raj and on the same very day Sh. Lekh Raj along with his two daughters Suman and Lata came to Jullana and the petitioner was compelled to work like a maid servant in high running temperature and on the next morning the petitioner was unable to move out of the bed and she was compelled by her mother in law to perform the household chores and upon showing her inability Sh. Lekh Raj and his daughters gave physical beatings to the petitioner and despite persuasions made by the petitioner to Suman and Lata to advise their father not to give such inhuman treatment to her but Suman and Lata caught hold of the petitioner and her hands and legs were tied up and she was locked in a room. On the next morning, the respondent untied the petitioner. Since the petitioner was under trauma and was scared, she was compelled to execute/put signature on certain blank papers/documents and even got posted one letter in her hand writing about her good living to her parents house. On the next morning the petitioner some how managed to came 13 back to her parental home at Delhi and remained at parental home for about 8 months and during period of her stay at her parental home, she herself as well as her parents themselves and through common relative etc. tried to persuade the respondent and his family members not to spoil the marital life but all in vain." Para 14 - "That on 14th January 1998 the petitioner was shocked to receive a telephonic call form Mr. Lekh Raj, brother in law of the respondent who claimed that in case she of her own does not visit the matrimonial home immediately, they will solemnise the second marriage of the respondent and assured that nobody will cause any kind of cruelty in future. Believing the said assurances, and in order to maintain peace and harmony in the family the petitioner visited Jullana with her brother and started residing with the respondent. During the period of her stay, there was all normal for about six month." 11. In the petition u/s. 18 of the Act, a Hindu wife while living separately from her husband is required to justify her separate living before she can claim any maintenance thereunder. Section 18 of the Act provides as under: " (I) Subject to the provisions of this Section, a Hindu wife, whether married before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be entitled 14 to be maintained by her husband during her lifetime. (II) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live separately from her husband without forfeiting her claim to maintenance, (a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of abondoning her without reasonable cause and without her consent or against her wish, or of willfully neglecting her; (b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension in her mind that it will be harmful or injuries to live with her husband; (c) if he is suffering from a virulent form of leprosy; (d) if he has any other wife living; (e) if he keeps a concubine in the same house in which his wife is living or habitually resides with a concubine elsewhere; (f) if he has ceased to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion; (g) if there is any other cause justifying her living separately. (III) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to separate residence and maintenance from her husband if she is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to another religion." 12. It is clear from the perusal of averments of para 10,11,12,13 and 14 of the petition that through these averments accused sought to justify her 15 living separately. On reading these para's along with the remaining para of the petition, it becomes clear that accused had no intention to defame the complainant, his mother or his family member. Accused was just trying to put up a strong case for the relive u/s. 18 of the Act. Therefore, accused cannot be held guilty for the offence of defamation punishable u/s. 500 IPC. I am supported in my view by judgment of Hon'ble High Court rendered in " S.P. Satsangi vs. Krishna Kumar Satsangi ". 13. Explanation 4 to Section 499 IPC lays down as under: "No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful." 14. Complainant himself in his defamation stated that accused has circulated the allegations made in her petition u/s. 18 of the Act amongst his friends and relatives and because of these allegations complainant has been downgraded in the eyes of others. Those other people/friends mentioned by CW 1 in examination in chief were not examined in the 16 present case. The people/friends mentioned above were the best witnesses in the present case. Section 114 of Indian Evidence Act lays down as under: " The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case." 15. Illustration (g) to Section 114 Indian Evidence Act provides that "the Court may presume that the evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be unfavourable to the person who withholds it." 16. Since the complainant failed to examine his friends or relatives amongst whom the allegations made by the accused in her petition u/s. 18 of the Act were circulated, an inference is drawn that reputation and image of complainant was not lowered down in the eyes those people by the averments of petition of accused filed u/s. 18 of the Act. One of the witness examined in the present case is the mother of complainant and other witness is brother in law of complainant. These two witnesses are family members of complainant and are interested witnesses. They do not come under the category of "friends, relatives and other people" as mentioned by CW 1 in examination in chief. Therefore, the present 17 complaint is hit by exception 4 to Section 499 IPC. 17. In (1968) Andhra Law Times 101 (104) it was held as under: " Defamation is injury to one's reputation and reputation is what other person thing of a man and no one's own opinion about oneself." 18.. Ninth exception to Section 499 IPC provides as under : " It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation to made in good faith for the protection of the interest of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good." 19. As has been discussed above accused made the aforesaid imputations in her petition u/s. 18 of the Act in good faith for protection of her interest as well as in the interest of her minor son. In other words, accused is entitled to the benefit of 9th exception of Section 499 IPC. In the complaint it is stated that brother of complainant Ram Bhagat has not acquired any property or any share in the property. However, in cross examination, complainant himself admitted that a civil suit was pending during the life time of Ram Bhagat with regard to property situated in village Chidhi and Ram Bhagat was also a party in that suit. PW 1 further admitted that as a part of compromise, wife of Ram Bhagat was given 1/8th share in the property in village Chidhi. In other words, complainant has 18 contradicted the averment of complaint in his cross examination which goes to shows that the case of complainant is false. 20. Even the witnesses who have been examined by the complainant apart from himself hardly deposed anything regarding the defamation of complainant. CW 1 only stated that she was pained to hear about the allegation which were stated to have been made by the accused. CW 1 nowhere deposed that because of the allegations made by accused she or her son has been defamed. Similarly, CW 3 in the last line of his examination in chief deposed that he was pained to hear form the complainant that accused has made allegations in her maintenance petition about him and his wife which were intended to defame him and his family members. In other words, the evidence is not sufficient to bring the guilt of accused within the four corner of Section 499 Cr.PC. 21. In 1983 Crl. J. 1694 St. of Himachal Pradesh Vs. Thakur Dass Etc . relied upon by the complainant, it was held that "When the statement of fact made by a witness is not challenged in cross examination, the fact in question must be held to be not disputed". 22. In 1961 Calcutta 359 - A.F.G Carapiet Vs. F.F.O.D. It was held that "Whenever opponent is declined to avail himself of the opportunity to put his essential and material case in cross examination, it must follow tht he believed that the testimony given could not be disputed at all". 19 23. These judgments will not help the complainant as accused cross examined the main witness i.e., complainant. It has already been observed that other complainant witnesses i.e., CW 1 Ram Dai and CW 3 Lekh Raj, are the interested witnesses. None of them nowhere deposed that accused has defamed the complainant. 24. In 1987 Crl. 764, it was held as under: "A complaint u/s. 500 IPC for defamation will be barred if filed three years after the commission of offence." The present case has been filed within the limitation and therefore, the law laid down is of little significance. 25. From the above discussion it is clear that complainant has failed to prove its case against the accused. Accused is accordingly acquitted. Bail bonds of accused is cancelled. Surety is discharged. File be consigned to Record Room. ANNOUNCED IN OPEN COURT ON 28.09.07 ( SANDEEP YADAV ) METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE DELHI. 20 SURESH JINDAL VS. ARCHANA AGGARWAL 28.09.07 Pr. Complainant with Counsel Accused on bail Vide separate judgment passed today, accused has been acquitted. An application moved on behalf of accused seeking legal action against the complainant on account of tempering his examination in chief, is pending. Accused states that she does not want to press for the same and seek permission to withdraw that application. Application is disposed of as withdrawn. File be consigned to Record Room. M.M. DELHI/28.09.07