Sangameshwara Swamygalu vs Eeregowda on 16 September, 2020 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU DATED THIS THE 16TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2020 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE B.A. PATIL CRIMINAL PETITION NO.1483/2016 BETWEEN: SANGAMESHWARA SWAMYGALU S/O SHANMUKHA, AGE : 46 YEARS, OCC: PRESIDENT, SANGAMESHWARA EDUCATION TRUST R/O JEEVANAHALLI MUTT, HASSAN DISTRICT, HASSAN - 573 201. ... PETITIONER (BY SRI. H.S.CHANDRAMOULI, ADVOCATE [THROUGH VC]) AND: EEREGOWDA, S/O NENGEGOWDA, AGE: 54 YEARS, R/O HASKOORU KENCHAMMANA HOSAKOTE AALOOR TALUK, HASSAN DISTRICT - 573 213. ... RESPONDENT (BY SRI.I.S.PRAMODCHANDRA, ADVOCATE [THROUGH VC]) THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 482 OF CR.P.C. PRAYING TO QUASH THE ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS IN C.C.NO.34/2014 (PCR NO.3/2011) ON THE FILE OF II ADDITIONAL SENIOR CIVIL JUDGE AND JMFC AT HASSAN REGISTERED AGAINST THE PETITIONER FOR THE OFFENCE PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTIONS 499, 500 OF IPC . 2 THIS CRIMINAL PETITION COMING ON FOR ADMISSION THIS DAY, THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING: ORDER This petition has been filed by the petitioner/accused under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. praying this Court to quash the proceedings in CC.No.34/2014 (PCR No.3/2011) on the file of II Additional Senior Civil Judge and J.M.F.C., at Hassan for the offences punishable under Sections 499 and 500 of IPC. 2. I have heard the learned counsel Sri.H.S.Chandramouli for Sri.K.V.Thimmaiah, for the petitioner/accused and Sri.I.S.Pramodchandra for the respondent/complainant. 3. Though the present case has been listed for admission, with the consent of the learned counsel appearing for both parties, same is taken up for final disposal. 4. The brief facts of case as averred are: A private complaint has been filed by the respondent alleging that the petitioner/accused filed a 3 complaint to the Education Officer, Zilla Panchayath, Hassan on 02.09.2010, by making certain allegations as against the complainant. It is further stated in the complaint that the said allegations made in the complaint are with an intention to harm the reputation of the complainant by false allegations. It is his further contention that the public at large wherever he is working and come in contact with others scolded and asked him about such complaint and the said latter has defamed him and in that light, he has filed a private complaint on 04.06.2011 and the same has been referred to the Police Officer for investigation on 22.06.2011 and the Investigating Officer in turn filed a report on 28.11.2011 stating that in view of the bar under Section 199 of Cr.P.C., he was not authorized to investigate the matter and he reported the same. Thereafter on 13.07.2012, the learned Magistrate accepted the cause shown by the Police and subsequently by order dated 23.12.2014, he took cognizance and directed to register a 4 case as against the petitioner/accused and summons has been issued to the accused. Challenging the same, the petitioner/accused is before this Court. 5. The main ground urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner/accused is that, while passing the impugned order dated 23.12.2014, the learned Magistrate has not recorded the sworn statement and has not applied his mind and without taking the cognizance, he has proceeded to register the case and issued the summons. It is against the provision of law. 6. It is his further submission that the cognizance which has been taken by the learned Magistrate is after three years and it is barred by limitation under Section 468 of Cr.P.C. It is his further submission that the contents of the complaint and other material do not disclose the offence under Section 499 of IPC. It is his further submission that he has filed the complaint on 02.09.2010 and it is a privilege communication by filing a 5 complaint to the officer concerned and it has not been published with an intention to defame the complainant. It is his further submission that the trial Court without taking into consideration the said aspects has proceeded to issue summons to the accused. It is nothing but abuse of process of law. On these grounds, he prayed to allow the petition and to quash the proceedings. 7. Per contra, the learned respondent/ complainant vehemently argued and submitted that the complaint, which has been given to the higher authorities, does not appear to be a complaint; even in the complaint, no prayer has been made to take any action against the complainant. In that light, the complaint itself clearly indicates that only with an intention to defame the complainant, such allegations have been made. It is his further submission that the Departmental Enquiry has been held and he has been exonerated from all the allegations and that false allegations have been made as against the complainant. It is his further submission 6 that the allegations, if they have been left kept open and if the same has been come within the knowledge of the other persons, then under such circumstances, the explanation given under Section 499 of IPC will not apply and that the benefit cannot be given to the accused. 8. It is his further submission that the private complaint clearly discloses all the ingredients, which has been necessary to constitute an offence punishable under Section 499 of IPC. It is his further submission that when a private complaint has been registered, the learned Magistrate after application of his mind has taken the cognizance and thereafter the matter has been referred to the Police for the purpose of investigation under Section 156 clause (3) of Cr.P.C . and the Investigating Officer in turn filed a report on 28.11.2011 stating that in view of bar under Section 199 of Cr.P.C., he was not authorized to investigate and in that light, on 23.12.2014 that he has taken all the aspects and has proceeded to register a criminal case and has issued the 7 summons and that there is no violation of any of the provisions of law. On these grounds, he prayed to dismiss the petition as devoid of merits. 9. I have carefully and cautiously gone through the submissions made by learned counsel appearing for the parties and perused the records. 10. The first and foremost contention taken up by the learned counsel for petitioner is that the learned Magistrate without application of his mind and without recording the sworn statement of the complainant has taken the cognizance by violating the principles of law. On perusal of the records and even it is an admitted fact by both the Counsel that earlier a complaint has been filed and the learned Magistrate after taking the cognizance has referred the complaint to the Police under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. for the purpose of investigation and subsequently, the Investigating Officer has filed a report on 28.11.2011 stating that in view of Section 199 8 of Cr.P.C., he was not authorized to investigate the case and in that light, the matter has been re-submitted to the Court and on 23.12.2014 that the learned Magistrate after perusal of the complaint, sworn statement and documents produced by the complainant has come to the conclusion that there is a prima facie case that the accused has committed an offence and in that light, he has directed to register a criminal case as against the accused and issued summons. 11. On perusal of the order dated 23.12.2014 and the circumstances under which the said order has been passed, all these facts clearly go to show that the learned Magistrate after taking into consideration the contents of the complaint, documents and the sworn statement has come to the right conclusion and has rightly issued the summons and there is no illegality or irregularity in passing such order. In that light, the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner are not sustainable in law. 9 12. The second contention, which has been stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner is, that the ingredients of Section 499 of IPC are not disclosed and no offence has been made out. 13. On perusal of the contents of the complaint, it clearly goes to show that a complaint has been registered by the accused on 02.09.2010 and that the said complaint also contains certain allegations said to have been committed by the complainant and in that light, the complaint has been filed. Whether the ingredients are there or not has to be prima facie seen in this behalf as it requires a detailed enquiry. But on perusal of the contents of the complaint, it is alleged that the reputation of the complainant has been affected and some persons in the public have asked him about the said complaint and the allegations therein. 14. Under such circumstances, prima facie there is a material to come to the conclusion that the ingredients 10 of Section 499 are there and in that light also, there are no grounds to hold that there is no material as against the petitioner/accused. 15. Even it is contended by the learned counsel for the respondent/complainant that the contents of the complainant do not contain the prayer and as such, it is not considered to be a complaint, but as could be seen from the complaint dated 02.09.2010, in the first instance itself it has been mentioned that it is a complaint as against one Eeregowda, who is working as First Division Assistant. Hence, it is considered to be a complaint. The only issue in this particular behalf is that whether such contents in the complaint have defamed the complainant or not, is a matter of fact, which has to be adjudicated only at the time of trial and not at this premature stage and it cannot be held that there is no allegation made in this behalf. 11 16. The next contention, which has been taken up by the learned counsel for the petitioner/accused is, that the cognizance, which has been taken, is barred by time under Section 468 of Cr.P.C. For the purpose of brevity, I quote Section 468(2) of Cr.P.C., which reads as under: "468. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation.--(1) . . . . . . . (2) The period of limitation shall be-- (a) six months, if the offence is punishable with fine only; (b) one year, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year; (c) three years, if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding one year but not exceeding three years." 17. On perusal of the said Section, it indicates that if the offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term exceeding one year, but not exceeding three years, then under such circumstances, cognizance has to be taken within a period of three years and the punishment, which 12 is prescribed for the offence punishable under Section 399 , is only two years or with fine. 18. Keeping in view the said facts and circumstances as admittedly the complaint has been registered on 04.06.2011 and subsequently the matter has been referred to the Police and he filed his report on 28.11.2011 stating that in view of bar under Section 199 of Cr.P.C., he was not authorized to investigate the case and thereafter the learned Magistrate took cognizance on 23.12.2014 admittedly by taking into consideration the dates from 04.06.2011 to 23.12.2014 that it is beyond three years after filing of the complaint. Hence, in that light, I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner/accused has made out a case that the cognizance taken after the period of three years is barred by time as per Section 468 of Cr.P.C. and in that light, the proceedings initiated as against the petitioner/accused are liable to be quashed. 13 Accordingly, the petition is allowed. The proceedings initiated in CC.No.34/2014 (PCR No.3/2011) on the file of II Additional Senior Civil Judge and JMFC at Hassan, for the offences punishable under Sections 499 and 500 of IPC are hereby quashed. Sd/- JUDGE PGG/KNM/-