Stabbing, Shooting As The Case May Be. In ... vs Delhi on 30 March, 2010 IN THE COURT OF SH. SATINDER KUMAR GAUTAM, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE( WEST-04) , DELHI. SC NO. 189/1/2009 State Versus 1- Madan Lal @ Golu S/o Jhabbu Lal, R/o T-619, Near Baba Ram Dev Mandir, Baljit Nagar, Delhi. 2- Ambey Lal @ Ajay, S/o Ram Pal Bhatt. R/o Jhuggi No. K-135, Jhuggi Katputli Colony, Shadipur Depot. Delhi. (i)Case arising out of FIR No. 252/2009 U/S:392/397/411/34 IPC P.S. Patel Nagar (ii) Date of FIR 26/06/09 (iii) Date of Institution 25/09/09 (iv)Date of Final Arguments 19.03.2010 (v)Judgment reserved on 19.03.2010 (iv) Date of judgment 25.03.2010 JUDGMENT This judgment shall dispose of the case titled as Madan Lal etc being FIR No. 252/2009 u/s 392 / 397 / 411 / 34 IPC of P.S. Patel Nagar. As per case of the prosecution are that the accused persons facing trail for the allegation that on 26/06/2009 at 5.30Am at Patel road near Ramesh Namkeen Bhandar under jurisdiction of Patel Nagar both accused persons namely Madan Lal @ Golu and Ambey Lal @ Ajay in furtherance of their common intention committed robbery with Mahesh Kumar by forcibly and using surgical blade pointed on his neck and then S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 1/15 took out "Rs480, one ring, one chain and one Timex gold watch" from his TSR and later on found in possession and got recovered the "Timex watch" belonging to Mahesh Kumar complainant by committing robbery with him and thus thereby committed offence punishable u/s 392 / 397 / 411 / 34 IPC. The complainant Mahesh stated that, on 26/06/2009 in the morning while he was returning in his Auto after dropping a passenger and when reached after crossing Shadipur flyover at about 4.30/5AM morning, stopped the TSR on the side of the road. Two person whom he correctly identified as accused person, put a blade on his neck and started beating him and they asked him to deliver whatever he had. They took away his wrist watch of Timex company, Rs.480 and one gold ring and ran away. He ran after them shouting. Two Police Officials who were patrolling on the motor cycle caught the accused persons. He came to know the name of the accused persons as Ambey Lal and Madan Lal. His articles were recovered from the accused persons. Two surgical blades were also recovered from the accused persons. His statement vide Ex. PW1/A was recorded and police seized his wrist watch and sealed in a Pulanda with the seal of RK and seizure memo Pw1/B and surgical blades were also sealed in Pulanda vide memo PW1/C and arrested the accused persons vide arrest memo Ex Pw1/D, 1/E and personal search memos vide Ex Pw1/F, Pw1/G. The amount of Rs.480 and his ring were not recovered. It is further testified by the IO of the case ASI Rakesh that on 26.06.2009 he along with Ct. Dinesh were patrolling in the area near Katputali Colony at about 5.30AM heard some noise of chor -chor near Ramesh Namkeen Bhandar. Two boys found running, they were S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 2/15 apprehended. Behind them one complainant Mahesh Kumar came who informed regarding the incident of looting with him when he was in TSR . His timax watch and one ring and Rs. 480 were taken forcible by these two boys after putting surgical blades on the neck of complainant. IO recorded statement of Mahesh ex. PW1/A. He took search of booth these boys from Madan Lal and Ambe Lal two blades recovered and from the Ambe Lal @ Ajay one timax watch recovered which was seized vide memo PW1/B after sealing in a pulanda. The blades were also sealed in a pulanda with the seal of RK and seized vide memo PW1/C. IO ASI Rakesh prepared the rukka Ex. PW3/A and gave to Ct. Dinesh who went to PS and came after registration of FIR and handed over to him at the spot. IO ASI Rakesh prepared site plan PW3/B, recorded discloser statement of accused persons vide Ex. PW3/C and PW3/D, arrested them vide memo Ex. PW1/D and PW1/E and conducted their personal search conducted vide memo PW1/F and PW1/G. Both the accused were also found to be smack addict . IO ASI Rakesh recorded the statement of witnesses and deposited the case property in the Malkhana . After completing investigation challan was filed in court. On completion of proceeding u/s 207 IPC. the case file received by assignment and a prima facie charge for offence punishable u/s392/397/411/34 IPC framed, upon which the accused persons. pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The prosecution in order to establish the charges against the accused persons examined all the witnesses cited in the list of witnesses. PW1 Mahesh is the complainant and have reiterated the version as narrated in the preceding para of the judgment and has correctly S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 3/15 identified the accused persons by stating that "......two persons who are present in the court today, put a blade on my neck and started beating me and they asked me to deliver whatever I had. They took away my wrist watch of Timex company, Rs.480 and one my gold ring and ran away. I ran after them shouting. Two Police Officials who were patrolling on the motor cycle caught the accused persons. I came to know the name of the accused persons as Ambey Lal and Madan Lal. My articles were recovered from the accused persons.....". The complainant has also corroborated the versions of prosecution in respect of arrest of accused, conduction of their personal search, seizure of case property and preparation of the other relevant document during the investigation of this case and also identified his signature thereupon. The other witnesses examined in this case are the police witnesses and have deposed that facts of investigation as carried out in the present case and exhibited the document prepared during the investigation. After completion of prosecution evidence, statement of accused persons have also been recorded u/s 313 Cr.P.C. All the incriminating evidence come on record has been put to the accused persons. Both the accused denied the same and deposed that they have been falsely implicated in this false case. They have also denied to lead evidence in their defence. I have heard submission of Ld. APP for State, counsel for accused and also gone through the material on record. The offence for which the accused has been charged are U/s 392 read with 397/34 IPC and 411 IPC . The definition for the purpose of S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 4/15 punishment for robbery is defined U/s 390 IPC "Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. The offence of robbery is punishable U/s 392 IPC . When fear is used to enable any person to carry away booty, it amounts to robbery, theft is robbery when in committing theft or in order that theft by committing or in carrying away the booty force is used. Similarly robbery involve extortion hence person cannot be convicted both for the extortion and for robbery which is a special aggrievated from the extortion. The dacoity consisting of five or more persons conjointly commit or attempt to commit a robbery or where the whole number of persons conjointly committing or attempting to commit a robbery and person present and aiding such commission or attempt, amount to five or more, every person so committing, attempting or aiding, is said to commit "dacoity". So far as, in respect of the charge u/s 397 IPC, it is essential to satisfy the word "uses" for the purpose of section 391 IPC, robbery being committed by an offender who was armed with a deadly weapon which was then in the vision of the victim shown as to create a terror in the mind of victim and in that it should be further shown, have been used for cutting, stabbing, shooting as the case may be. In Phool Kumar Vs Delhi Administration AIR 1925 SC 905 and Jung Singh Vs State of Rajasthan 1984 Crl. J. 1135, in these two cases it was held that "use of deadly weapon by one offender at the time of committing robbery does not S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 5/15 attract section-397 for imposition of any minimum punishment for another offender who did not use such weapon and when the accused is charged U/s 395 read with 397 IPC for committing dacoity with attempt to cause grievous hurt, he cannot be convicted u/s 397 IPC only because one revolver had been recovered from the accused. This is no proof that he used the revolver while committing dacoity was charge u/s 397 will not attract. The provision postulates on only individual act of the accused to be relevant to attract section 397 IPC and thereby inevitably neglects the use of the contradict or vicarious liability engrafted in section 34 IPC. In case titled Sh. Shravan Dashratha Vs State of Maharashtra 1998 Crl. J. 1196 Bombay. The Bombay High Court has held that liability u/s 397 IPC he individually and not contradictive and this would become crystal clear and analysis of the section 397 IPC, it is only when a person while committing dacoity or attempting to commit dacoity uses any deadly weapon or caused grievous hurt or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person then that person will be guilty of section 397 IPC. When there is no evidence at the time of committing robbery the accused used any deadly weapon or caused any grievous hurt or made any attempt to cause death or grievous to any person who cannot be convicted u/s 397 IPC. The prosecution case is that it is the co-accused who inflicted the major injuries to the victim by committing high way robbery. Even though the accused participated in the case of robbery he did not commit any offence u/s 397 IPC and committing the offence U/s 392 and 394 IPC . The section 390 IPC contemplates that the accused should have, from the very start, the intention to deprive the complainant of the property, and should for that purpose either hurt him or place him under S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 6/15 wrongful restraint. The definition of "robbery" requires that either death or hurt or wrongful confinement is caused or it must be actually found that the victims were put in fear of instant death, instant hurt or instant wrongful confinement. In the absence of these findings and merely because the articles were removed from the persons of the victims when the accused were armed with lathis, does not by itself make out a case of robbery. Where no force or show of force is found to have been used in the committing of theft, etc. the offence of robbery cannot be said to have been committed. If theft is already committed and violence is used to help an offender to escape, theft is not robbery. When two views are possible that violence was used either to help in removal of stolen article or to enable an offender to escape after commission of theft, the view favourably to the accused should be accepted. Accidental infliction of the injury by the thief will not convert offence into robbery that come under the definition of theft. The accused abandoned the property obtained by theft and through stones at his pursuer but determined him from continuing pursuit. It was held that the accused was guilty of theft and not for robbery. It is not sufficient that any transaction of committing theft, hurt etc. has been caused. If hurt etc. is caused at the time of commission of theft but for an object other than the one referred in this section theft would not amount to robbery. There is no rule of thumb that after the lapse of a long period the witnesses would in no case be able to identify the robbers they had seen in the course of robbery. The court has to be extremely cautious in appraising such evidence and the decision in each case must turn on its own special facts. Where the ocular witnesses had ample opportunity to notice and mark the special S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 7/15 features of the miscreants and they had given some particulars of identify of the culprits in their statements to the police and they were not cross examined on this point vis-a-vis their police statements, the identity of the appellants as the robbers was established beyond reasonable doubt. In the instant case prosecution in order to prove the allegation of 392/397 read with section 411 / 34 IPC cited only five witnesses. Complainant Mahesh is the star witness and case of the prosecution is circumsfrence on his testimony. PW Mahesh Kumar deposed that at the instance of surgical blade both accused persons has robbed his wrist watch of Timex company of rs. 480/- and one gold ring has been looted by accused. Only the wrist watch was found to be recovered from the possession of the accused persons. However, as regarding the money and gold ring the prosecution has not given any explanation as who has eloped the said articles nor it has been stated from in whose possession the wrist watch has been recovered and similarly the deposition made by the complainant with respect to the two surgical blades. The surgical blade as alleged to have been kept on the neck of the complainant at the time of looting of the said articles. However there is no injury of any kind on the person of complainant. The surgical blade is an instrument like like such if it is attacked to the body of the person it will certainly given an impact. There is no opinion has ever being taken from any expert whether the said surgical blade came within the category of dangerous weapon. The accused persons in their deposition u/s 313 Cr.P.C have denied each and every incriminating evidence with the deposition that they have been falsely implicated in this cse and the wrist watch is belonging to them. The place where the occurrence has been taken place is the thoroughfare . S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 8/15 There were persons were going on the way but none of the public witnesses have been joined in the investigation. The occurrence had been taken place at the busy place where the public persons were coming and going and there were some hawkers were available. It is possible for the prosecution to produce and join the independent witnesses but none of the witness have been joined nor any description were noted down. The IO has not given any legal notice to person who refused to join in the proceeding. There is no hard and fast rule that known person would not go to commit dacoity without taking care of concealing their faces. It depends on the temperaments of a person. There can be hardened criminals. When a known person is desperate and very much inimical, he can go to commit dacoity without taking the usual precaution of covering his face. Contradiction in the evidence of prosecution witnesses as to the weapons possessed by the accused do not discredit the testimony of such witnesses. The testimony of an identifying witness is not open to doubt merely because the name of the witness does not appear in the first information report. Where the identity of the dacoits could not be established and witnesses produced were interested parties and also the delay in filing the first information report was not explained, the conviction of the accused could not be maintained. As a general rule, a court can and may act on the uncorroborated testimony of a single witness. However, in order to sustain an order of conviction on the basis of the testimony of a solitary witness the evidence must be clear , cogent, convincing and should be of an unimpeachable character. PW1 complainant Mahesh Kumar in his deposition has stated S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 9/15 that the articles were recovered from the accused persons, were his Timex watch and two surgical blades. His money and gold ring was not recovered. He can identify his Timex Watch and two surgical blades. In cross examination he further stated that " when he was taking the rest on Shadipur Flyover suddenly the accused persons came there and struck the surgical blade by the accused Bholu and Madan Lal after beating him had snatched h is all valuable articles. When he was sleeping in the TSR the accused persons struck the blade on his neck and also started beating him there." Initially the FIR was registered u /s 382/411/34 IPC . Section 382 IPC describes the possession by a thief at the time of h is committing a theft on the basis of knife or other weapon, which, if used on a human being, might cause death or hurt would not of itself justify a conviction under the section. There must be something to show or from which it may properly be inferred, that the offender made preparation for causing one or more of the result mentioned in the section. A stole some rice from a house. While carrying it away he was seized by . He thereupon dropped the rice and then stabbed with a knife. He was convicted of voluntarily causing hurt while committing robbery under section 394 . It was held that as a dropped the rice before stabbing he could not h ave caused the hurt for the purpose of carrying away the rice as held in a case titled as Diwan Singh 1980 Cri LJ 760 (MP). In the present case there is no grievous hurt or any kind of injuries on the person of complainant and the accused persons used the surgical blade is a deadly weapon. Nor any such opinion was given by the expert person that the weapon used by the accused person is deadly S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 10/15 weapon. Therefore, ingredients for offence u/s 397 IPC is not attracted, at the most when the FIR was recorded u/s 382 IPC apart from section 411 / 34 IPC are attracted against the accused persons. The deposition made by complainant Mahesh Kumar is convincing and inspired confidence to prove the guilt of the accused u/s 382 / 411 / 34 IPC. Apart from it the Timex Watch recovered from the possession of the accused persons also being admitted by the complainant which belonging to him. Accused persons have not claimed that the Timex wrist watch made was belonging to them nor they produced any invoices to this effect. The recovery of wrist watch was taken place soon after the crime has committed. 'Dishonest intention' is proved when the accused is found in unaccounted stolen article and he is unable to give any proof of the ownership. The presumption U/s. 114 (a) of the Evidence Act is that if there is other evidence to convict the accused with the crime, however the findings of the stolen property with him is a piece of evidence against him and in such a case presumption U/s. 114 (a) of Evidence Act cannot be invoked. In a leading case titled as " Public Prosecutor Vs. Yerra Arjuna " 1998 Crl. L.J 179 (AP) it was held that :-"Recovery of ornaments of the deceased at the instance of the accused having been proved and there is nothing to connect him with dacoity and murder, the presumption under Section 114(a) can be raised against the accused to prove that it was the accused who was receiver of stolen goods knowing it to be stolen." Considering the aforesaid discussion, facts and circumstances of the case it revealed that the prosecution has proved the guilt of the S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 11/15 accused persons within the four corners of the section 382 / 411 / 34 IPC as the testimony of prosecution witnesses are convincing, corroborative, trustworthy and believable. The statement of complainant Mahesh Kumar is unimpeachable character and inspired strong confidence. Therefore, both the accused persons namely Madan Lal @ Golu S/o Jhabbu Lal and Ambey Lal @ Ajay S/o Ram Pal Bhatt are hereby convicted for offence punishable u/s 382 / 411 / 34 IPC. ANNOUNCED IN THE OPEN COURT TODAY ON 25.03.2010 (SATINDER KUMAR GAUTAM) ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE(WEST-04) DELHI S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 12/15 IN THE COURT OF SH. SATINDER KUMAR GAUTAM, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE( WEST-04) , DELHI. SC NO. 189/1/2009 State Versus 1- Madan Lal @ Golu S/o Jhabbu Lal, R/o T-619, Near Baba Ram Dev Mandir, Baljit Nagar, Delhi. 2- Ambey Lal @ Ajay, S/o Ram Pal Bhatt. R/o Jhuggi No. K-135, Jhuggi Katputli Colony, Shadipur Depot. Delhi. FIR No. 252/2009 U/S:392/397/411/34 IPC P.S. Patel Nagar ORDER ON SENTENCE: Present: Sh. Harinder Kumar, Substitute, Additional Public Prosecutor for State. Both convicts/accused from J/C with counsel Sh. R.K. Mishra. Both the convicts/accused persons have been convicted for offence punishable u/s 382 / 411 / 34 IPC vide separate detailed judgment dated 25.03.2010 . I have heard submission of Ld. APP for State and counsel for accused on the point of sentence and carefully gone through the material on record. Ld. APP for state submitted that prosecution proved its case against both the accused beyond all reasonable doubts and the testimony of all the prosecution witnesses inspire confidence, they are trustworthy and reliable. Both the accused have not given any rebuttal to dispute the allegations made against them. As per the provision of 114 (A) of the Evidence Act "there are sufficient evidence against the accused persons to connect them with the crime itself. The accused persons have not given any proof of ownership over the case property. Therefore, they are S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 13/15 liable to be convicted in accordance with law. On the contrary, Ld. Counsel for accused persons that they have clean antecedents, they have not been previously convicted and they are young boys. It is further contended that they have remained in J/C for about 9 months. The offence u/s 392 and 397 IPC has not been proved against them and convicted for offence u/s 382 / 411 / 34 IPC. Therefore, prayed to released both the accused for the period of imprisonment already undergone by them during investigation, inquiry and trial of this case. In view of the submissions made by the Ld. APP for state and counsel for convicted and the provision of law, I am of the view that it has been very aptly indicated in Dennis Councle MCG Dautha Vs State of Callifornia (402 US 183: 28 L.D. 2d 711) that no formula of foolproof nature is possible that would provide a reasonable criterion in determining a just and appropriate punishment in the infinite variety of circumstances that may affect the gravity of the crime. In the absence of any foolproof formula which may provide any basis for reasonable criteria to correctly assess various circumstances germane to the consideration of gravity of crime, the discretionary judgment in the facts of each case, is the only way in which such judgment may be equitably distinguished. In 2008 X AD (S.C.) 645 in case titled as Siriya @ Shri Lal Vs State of Madhya Pradesh , it has been held that, "in operation of Sentencing System, law should adopt corrective machinery or the deterrence based on factual matrix facts and given circumstances in each case, the nature of the crime, in manner in which it was planned and committed, the motive for commission of the crime, the conduct of the accused, nature of weapons used and all other attending circumstances are relevant in award of sentence. Sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do more harm to the justice system to undermine the public confidence in the efficacy in law. .......... In each case, there should be proper balancing of aggravating and mitigating circumstances on the basis of relevant circumstances in a dispassionate manner. The contagion of lawlessness would undermine social order and lay it in ruins. Protection of society and stamping out criminal proclivity must be the object of law which must be achieved by imposing appropriate S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 14/15 sentence. Therefore, law as a cornerstone of the edifice of "order" should meet the challenges confronting the society. Friedman in his "Law in Changing Society" stated that, "State of criminal law continues to be as it should be decisive reflection of social consciousness of society". Therefore, in operating the sentencing system, law should adopt the corrective machinery or the deterrence based on factual matrix. In Sevaka Perumal etc. Vs State of Tamil Nadu (1991 (3) SCC 471 "It is therefore, the duty of every court to award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was executed or committed etc. Therefore to consider the aforesaid discussion as well as contention raised by the Ld. APP for state and the counsel for the convicted, the convicted/accused Madan Lal @ Golu S/o Jhabbu Lal and Ambey Lal @ Ajay, S/o Ram Pal Bhattare hereby sentenced for the period of imprisonment already undergone by them , during investigation, inquiry and trial of this case with fine of Rs 50,000/- each in default of fine both the accused will also undergo Six Months SI for the offence u/s 382 / 411 / 34 IPC. I think the sentence awarded to both the convicted shall meet the end of justice. Copy of this order as well as of judgment be given both the accused free of cost. File be consigned to Record Room. ANNOUNCED IN THE OPEN COURT TODAY ON 30.03.2010 (SATINDER KUMAR GAUTAM) ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE(WEST-04) DELHI S.C.No. 189/1/2009 Page 15/15