Paramjeet Singh & Ors vs Devender Kumar Handa on 7 June, 2019 IN THE COURT OF MS VANDANA JAIN, ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE­07 (SE), SAKET COURTS NEW DELHI CS No. 206743/16 Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa In the matter of: 1. Sh. Paramjeet Singh 2. Smt. Harbans Kaur 3. Sh. Gurinder Singh All R/o ­House no. 33, Old Double Storey Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi ­110024 ...........Plaintiff VERSUS Sh. Devender Kumar Handa S/o Sh. Narender Kumar Handa R/o N­39, Old Double Storey Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi ­24 .................Defendants Date of Institution : 27.11.2014 Date of Reserving : 30.05.2019 Date of Judgment : 07.06.2019 JUDGMENT Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 1/15 1. This is a suit for recovery of damages for a sum of Rs. 10 lacs. 2. Brief facts of the case are that the plaintiffs are owners/occupiers of the property bearing no. N­33, Old Double Storey, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi. Defendants are in occupation of the property bearing no. N­39, Old Double Storey, Lajpat Nagar­ IV, New Delhi. Plaintiff no. 2 is the wife of plaintiff no. 1 and plaintiff no. 3 is son of plaintiff no. 1 and 2. It is stated that litigation have been going on between the plaintiffs and defendant for past few years and as such, the defendant always tries to create atmosphere for harassing and humiliating the plaintiffs, who are old and ailing (except defendant no. 3). 3. Defendant filed a private complaint under section 200 Cr.P.C with the prayer to take cognizance against the plaintiffs for commission of an offence under section 191 , 192 and 193 IPC. It is stated that allegations contained in the said complaint were false, frivolous and misconceived even to the knowledge of the defendant. Ld MM summoned all the plaintiffs as accused persons in the said complaint. 4. Plaintiffs appeared before the Ld. MM in compliance and Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 2/15 directions of the summons received. It is stated that a perusal of the complaint revealed that grave charges of forgery and fabrication and making false statement were levelled by the defendant against the plaintiffs. Accordingly, a revision petition was filed against the said summoning order. Ever after the oral directions of the Ld. Revisionist Court, the defendant pressed the appearance of the plaintiffs before the Ld. MM with malafide intentions and ulterior motives of humiliating and harassing the plaintiffs. 5. It is further stated that not only this, after filing the said false and frivolous complaint against the plaintiffs, the defendant started defaming them in the locality by saying to their neighbours and other respectable persons in the locality that the plaintiffs have committed grave penal offences of forgery and they are about to got behind bars. 6. Due to this, health of plaintiffs no. 1 and 2 deteriorated in as much as plaintiff no. 1 Sh. Paramjeet Singh had to undergo pacemaker implant and had to spent a lot of amount for the same. It is stated that plaintiff no. 2 Harbans Kaur who is very old and ailing also suffered mentally and physically on account of said illegal acts. Not even this , the defendant also made plaintiff no. 3 Gurvinder Singh made to appear before the court, knowing very Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 3/15 well that he normally resides out of India. The intention was obvious i.e. to pressurize the plaintiffs as much as he could and achieve his illegal goals. 7. It is further stated that even when the said Revision petition was being argued, the defendant knew that the same is likely to be allowed and the summoning order is likely to be set aside, as the complaint itself was not maintainable, and after taking lot of adjournments in the said Revision petition, the defendant made a statement that he wants to withdraw the complaint filed by him. The ground for withdrawal was that he had filed application under section 340 Cr.P.C before the concerned Court. On the basis of the said statement, the said Revision Petition was also withdrawn. However, the fact of the matter is that the defendant withdrew the same as the same was about to be allowed and further right from day one, he knew that the complaint was not maintainable. 8. It is stated that defendant had filed false, frivolous and misconceived application under Section 340 Cr. P.C against the plaintiffs before the court, where the suits are pending and the plaintiffs are appropriately contesting the same. From the aforesaid conduct of the defendant, it is absolutely clear and apparent that he indulged himself in said illegal activities of harassing, humiliating Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 4/15 and defaming the plaintiff's and causing mental and physical agony and trauma to them for achieving his illegal motives. 9. It is further stated that by indulging in said illegal activities the defendant has not only harassed, humiliated, defamed and traumatized the plaintiffs, but has also caused huge financial loss to them is as much as the plaintiffs were constrained to spent a considerable money as litigation charges, travelling expenses, on their health and on many more counts. Besides this, the plaintiffs have also suffered a lot on account of illegal acts of defemation committed by the defendant. The plaintiffs had to defend one criminal case and had to file Revision petition, as per legal advise and as such they spent a sum of Rs. 2 lacs from the said litigation. The plaintiffs no. 1 and 2 must have spent a sum of Rs. 2 lacs each on their health due to the mental and physical trauma and sufferings they were forced to undergo, on account of illegal acts of the defendant. The plaintiffs claim a sum of Rs. 1 lac which they must have spent in travelling charges and other incidental charges on account of the said litigation. It is stated that plaintiff no. 2 was also forced to come from abroad to attend the courts in Delhi and he spent a considerable amount for the same. The plaintiffs claim a sum of Rs. 5 lacs as compensation on account of loss of reputation, mental agony and sufferings and on account of defamatory acts committed by the defendants against them. Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 5/15 10. Plaintiff sent a legal notice dated 20.10.2014 and defendant replied the said legal notice on 27.10.2014. Thereafter, the present was filed. 11. Written statement was filed on behalf of defendant wherein it is stated that no cause of action has accrued in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant, which would entitle the plaintiff to file and maintain the present suit against the defendant. It is further stated that it is a settled proposition of law that statements of witnesses recorded in proceedings in courts are protected by "absolute privilege" therefore no case of defamation is made out. 12. It is further stated that the present case is a counter blast to the notice issued by the defendant for defamation as well as filing of the criminal complaint under section 340 Cr. P.C as well as the complaint under section 200 Cr. P.C by the defendant against the plaintiffs. The contents of plaint were denied. It was stated that the defendant withdrew the complaint as he had moved application u/s 340 Cr.P.C. in the suits before the concerned courts which are still pending. Rest of the allegations have been denied. It is further stated that suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed as the same is beyond limitation. Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 6/15 13. Replications to the written statement filed by the defendant wherein contents of the written statements were denied and contents of the plaint were reiterated. 14. After completion of the pleading, following issues were framed vide order dated 18.03.2016. (i) Whether plaintiff is entitled for the recovery of the suit amount as prayed for? OPP. (ii) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any interest? If so, at what rate and for what period? OPD (iii) Relief. 15. During evidence, plaintiff examined himself as PW1 and relied upon certain documents i.e. copy of general power of attorney Ex. PW1/1­OSR, copy of complaint filed before Ld MM, South East, Saket is Mark A Colly (same is Ex PW1/2 in the affidavit), copy of discharge summary of plaintiff is Ex. PW1/3 ­colly (OSR), copy of revision petition is Mark B, order dated 29.11.2016 is Ex. PW1/4, legal notice dated 20.10.2014 is Ex. PW1/5 and copy of reply dated 27.10.2015 is Ex. PW1/6. Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 7/15 16. Plaintiff also examined PW2 Manmohan Singh Oberoi and PW3 Jagdeep Saxena, Judicial Assistant, Record Room (Sessions), South­East, Saket Court. 17. During defendant evidence, defendant examined himself as DW1 and relied upon certain documents i.e. copy of order dated 19.03.2015 passed by the court of Ms. Tanvi Khurana, CJ, Saket is Ex. DW1/1, copy of complaint dated 04.09.2015 to Deputy Commissioner, SDMC sent by defendant is Mark A. (de exhibited Ex DW1/2), copy of complaint dated 29.06.2015 to Deputy Commissioner, SDMC sent by defendant is Ex. DW1/3. (OSR), copy of complaint dated 28.07.2015 to SHO, Amar Colony sent by the defendant is Ex. DW1/4. (OSR). 18. I have heard the arguments on behalf of both the parties and have perused the record carefully. 19. Ld counsel for plaintiffs has argued that the defendants have filed a false and frivolous complaint u/s 200 CrPC against the plaintiffs for commission of offence u/s 191 / 192 / 193 IPC and accused them of committing grave charges of forgery and fabrication and making false statements in suits pending in different courts. It is stated that plaintiffs were summoned on the Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 8/15 false representation made before Ld Metropolitan Magistrate and the said order was challenged before Ld Revision Court, however, during the pendency of the revision when the defendant felt that revision was about to be allowed, he gave an undertaking to withdraw the complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C. before Ld Metropolitan Magistrate. It is further argued that defendant has defamed the plaintiffs in the eyes of the respectable members of the society by stating that plaintiffs have committed grave penal offences of forgery and they are about to go behind the bars. Plaintiffs were confronted with the pending cases before number of people in the locality due to which their reputation was lowered in the eyes of the respectable persons in the society. It is further argued that due to mental and physical pressure created by defendant, health of plaintiff no. 1 and 2 deteriorated and plaintiff no. 1 and 2 had to undergo pacemaker implant and have to spend lot of money. It is further argued that plaintiff no. 2 also suffered from various ailments due to illegal acts of the defendant. It further argued that their son i.e. plaintiff no. 3 was forced to come to India on account of summoning by the court who had no role to play. It is further argued that plaintiffs are entitled to be compensated for the agony they have suffered. 20. Ld counsel for defendant, on the other hand, has argued that present case is false and frivolous. He further submits that no case Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 9/15 is made out at all as complaint u/s 200 CrPC was withdrawn by the defendant in order to move an application u/s 340 Cr.P.C. before respective courts and same are pending adjudication. He has further argued that plaintiffs have not prove anything with respect to defamation. He has further argued that case was actually pending and anything said with respect to pendency of the case cannot be termed as defamation. He has further argued that plaintiffs have miserably failed to prove their case. He has further argued that averments of the plaintiffs that plaintiff no. 3 i.e. son of the plaintiff no. 1 and 2 had come to India on account of appearing before Ld Metropolitan Magistrate is false which has been admitted by PW­1 in his cross examination. He further argued that case is false and is liable to be dismissed. 21. I have heard the arguments and have perused the record carefully. 22. I shall deal with issues one by one. 23. Issue No. 1 Whether plaintiff is entitled for the recovery of the suit amount as prayed for? OPP. 24. Onus to prove this issue was upon plaintiff. Plaintiff has sought compensation of Rs. 10,00,000/­ as damages towards defamation as defined u/s 499 of Indian Penal Code. Section 499 Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 10/15 IPC is reproduced herein as under:­ "Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1.­ It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.­ It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.­ An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.­ No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful." Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 11/15 25. Perusal of the pleadings as well as evidence of the parties reveals that though there are allegations of committing offence of defamation against defendant, however, there is no specific averment as to when and what defendant stated and to whom. It was stated that the reputation and good will of the plaintiffs was lowered in the eyes of the members of the society. Perusal of cross examination of PW­1 is very interesting, he does not deny that he had made false statement in his written statement filed in a case titled as "Usha Singh Vs. Harbans Kaur & Ors" or has filed fabricated site plan alongwith written statement. He states that he does not remember whether he has made any false statement or filed any false site plan. Meaning thereby that prima facie it cannot be said that complaint moved by defendant u/s 200 Cr.P.C. was on the basis of the false allegations. Be the case as it may, it is pertinent to mention here that defendant withdrew his complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C . while revision was pending against summoning order before Ld Sessions Court stating that he had availed his remedy by filing application u/s 340 Cr.P.C. before concerned court in civil suits where defendant has made false statement. It is admitted by PW­1 during his cross examination that said suits are pending and he is contesting the same. 26. In support of his case, plaintiff no. 1 has examined PW­2 Sh. Manmohan Singh Oberoi in his case. In his affidavit and cross Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 12/15 examination, he stated that he is a resident of Rohini. It is worthwhile to note that plaintiffs are residing at Lajpat Nagar. No date, month or year has been given as to when PW­2 was present in the locality and defendant had defamed the plaintiffs in his presence. In the affidavit itself, he stated that he came to know that even neighbours of plaintiffs started seeing them with an eye of suspicion. This line clearly shows that nothing happened in his presence and whatsoever he said was hearsay. In para no. 11 of his affidavit, he has reproduced the paragraphs in verbatim as that mentioned in the plaint. No date and time has been given as to when this happened. During his cross examination, it was revealed that he had appeared as surety for the plaintiffs in the criminal case while enlarging them on bail. He also in his evidence could not tell as to when the defendant defamed the plaintiffs in his presence. No other witness from the locality has been produced by PW­1 in order to show that plaintiffs were defamed by defendant by saying any derogatory/defamatory words in their presence. Evidence of PW­2 is not all significant for the reasons that first of all he is an interested witness. Secondly, he is not the resident of same locality and thirdly he does not point out as to when he visited the locality of the plaintiffs and defendant and heard the defamatory words from the mouth of the defendant against the plaintiffs. 27. Compensation has also been claimed on account of Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 13/15 deterioration of health of plaintiff no. 1 and 2 due to harassment by defendant. Plaintiff no. 1 has stated that he has undergo pacemaker implant due to conduct of defendant. Apart from the discharge summary, no document has been produced to show that plaintiffs got ill in November 2012 when he was summoned by the court. Documents are of November 2013 and moreover they do not suggest that pacemaker was implanted in the body of the plaintiff no. 1 due to the harassment of the defendant. No document with respect to plaintiff no. 2 has been produced on record. 28. As regards the son i.e. plaintiff no. 3, it is mentioned that he had to come from abroad to appear before Ld Metropolitan Magistrate, however, from the testimony of PW­1 & PW­2, it is clear that their son never appeared before the court who had summoned plaintiff no. 3. No other document has been produced on record to show that plaintiff no. 3 ever came to India on account of his summoning by Ld Metropolitan Magistrate in the complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C . filed by defendant. The present suit has been filed in November 2014. Article 74 of Schedule to Limitation Act provides one year period of limitation for seeking compensation for defamation, however, neither plaintiffs have proved that how and when they were defamed. Therefore, present suit does not disclose any cause of action as such. Hence, this issue is decided against the plaintiffs and in favour of the defendant. Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 14/15 29. Issue No. (ii) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any interest? If so, at what rate and for what period? OPD 30. In view of findings given in issue no. 1, this issue is also decided against the plaintiffs and in favour of defendant. Relief. 31. Suit of the plaintiffs stands dismissed. 32. Decree sheet be prepared. No order as to cost. File be consigned to Record Room. Digitally signed by VANDANA VANDANA JAIN JAIN Date: 2019.06.07 Announced in the open 14:56:48 +0530 court on 07.06.2019 (VANDANA JAIN) ADJ­07/SE/SAKET COURTS/ NEW DELHI/07.06.2019 Paramjeet Singh & Ors Vs Devender Kumar Handa Page 15/15