Shabbir Ahmed vs The Public Prosecutor on 18 July, 2014 Author: K.B.K.Vasuki Bench: K.B.K.Vasuki IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS DATED: 18.07.2014 CORAM: THE HON'BLE Ms.JUSTICE K.B.K.VASUKI Crl.O.P.No.29101 of 2013 and M.P.Nos.1 and 2 of 2013 1.Shabbir Ahmed Senior Correspondent  Tamil Nadu Times Now TV M/s.Times Global Broadcasting Co. Ltd 2.Vivek Narayan Editor -Output Times Now TV M/s.Times Global Broadcasting Co. Ltd. 3.Arnab Goswami Senior Editor-in-Chief Times Now TV M/s.Times Global Broadcasting Co. Ltd. .. Petitioners Vs. The Public Prosecutor, Vellore District, Vellore. .. Respondent Criminal Original Petition is filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, praying to call for the records pertaining to the impugned complaint in CC No.6 of 2013 now pending trial on the file of the Principal District and Sessions Judge, Vellore and to quash the same. For Petitioners : Mr.V.Prakash, SC for Mr.Shubharanjani Ananth For Respondent : Mr.Shanmuga Velayutham, PP assisted by Mr.C.Emalias, APP O R D E R The petitioners herein are arrayed as A1 to A3 in CC.No.6/2013 on the file of the Principal District and Sessions Judge, Vellore for the offence under section 499 and punishable under section 500 IPC. The present petition is filed to quash the proceedings. 2.The proceedings in CC.No.6/2013 is initiated by the complainant in his capacity as the Public Prosecutor, Vellore by way of complaint, against (i)Reporter (ii)Editor-output (News Programme) and (iii)Editor-in-Chief of Times Now TV. The complaint was lodged, after obtaining due sanction order vide G.O.Ms.No.829 Public (Law & Order H) Department dated 1.8.2013. The alleged defamatory material referred to in the complaint is the conversation between the Reporter who is the first petitioner herein and the news anchor of the show telecast in Times Now TV on 22.7.2013 at 8pm on the NEWS HOUR Tonight Programme with the caption Times Now Breaking News. However, the anchor of the show was not made as a party in the proceedings. The conversation is in question and answer form concerning the detection of maggots in certain eggs supplied for the Nutritious Noon Meal Scheme at a school near Ambur, Vellore District. The complaint proceeds to praise about the novel scheme introduced by MGR for the benefit of pre-school and primary school children and the manner in which the children are benefited and the varieties in the Menu served and the maintenance of quality of meal served and as to how it prevents the children from dropping out of school and as to how it provides education to the children and it empowers women empowerment etc. It speaks about the time at which and the date on which the news item telecast in the TV as mentioned above. The statement, which is according to the complainant, defamatory in nature, was shown as scrolling news across the TV screen i.e., Live Worms found in Eggs, Eggs infested with worms in Mid-Day Meals, Rotten Eggs in Mid-Day Meals in Vellore, Worms crawl out of Mid-Day Meals and Are the Authorities blind to this? etc. The news item also explained the action taken by the District Collector by suspending two of its employees and by issuing show cause of notice to the supplier as to why rotten eggs were kept in the storage and to change the entire batch of 15000 egs that have been ordered/procured for Mid Day Meals Scheme. It is also alleged in the complaint that the news item is defamatory, sensational and scandalising, cast a slur on the Government and the Chief Minister, the Minister for social welfare, the Director, the District Collector and the Noon-Meal Scheme Project Director and casting untruthful and false aspersions with a view to denigrating their performance as Chief Minister of the State and as public servants thereby defaming them and the people is likely to assume that the Government treated the children with indifference and the image of the Government which ranked high in the opinion of the public, suffered and its esteem lowered in the eyes of the public, who seen the programme etc. 3.The learned counsel for the petitioners would seek the relief on the ground that none of the ingredients for which cognizance was taken, are made out and the allegations raised in the complaint even if accepted on the face value, do not prima facie attract any offence to make out the case against the petitioners. It is also contended that though the very same news was telecast by various news channels and news print publications, no proceedings is initiated against any other news channel/news print publications/news websites and the present proceedings against the petitioners herein is vindicative and malafide. It is further contended on the side of the petitioners that as the persons aggrieved under the sanction order are different, from the persons shown as aggrieved in the complaint, there is no sanction for proceeding against the petitioners, the same renders either the present complaint to be legally not maintainable and stands vitiated. 4.Per contra, the learned Public Prosecutor representing the complainant would seriously oppose the relief sought for in this petition by drawing the attention of this court to the contents of the news telecast and as to how the same are defamatory in nature. 5.Heard the rival submissions made on both sides. 6.The contents of the telecast regarding the discovery of rotten eggs in the storage room, storing the eggs meant to be served in the Noon Meal Scheme at a school near Ambur, Vellore District, are not denied. The fact that rotten eggs were found in the storage room and the District Collector was duly informed about the same and the District collector suspended two officials responding the Mid-Day Meals Scheme and issued show cause notice to the supplier to explain as to why rotten eggs were kept in the storage and to replace the entire batch of 15000 eggs, are also not denied. That being so, the truthfulness or otherwise of the contents of the news telecast need not be doubted herein. In that event, no case of defamation arises for having reported the same through media. 7.Even otherwise, there are other news channels, such as Headlines Today and NDTV and news print publications such as, Indian Express, The Hindu, The Outlook etc. who also telecast in detail of the incident. It is also put up on their respective web sites. The telecast by other news channels and news print publications, is earlier in point of time than the telecast by the Times Now TV channel. However, no case is foisted against other media, who telecast the same, but the petitioners' TV alone has been chosen for initiating criminal proceedings for defamation. 8.The learned counsel for the petitioners in support of his contention, cited the authority rendered by me reported in 2012 (2) CTC 352 ( Sanjay Pinto and another v. A.Kamaraj ), wherein, this court under similar circumstances observed that the failure to initiate criminal action against other print media, which is biased and malafide intention of the complainant in filing this complaint for wrecking vengeance due to his personnel vendetta, would only amount to act of unnecessary harassment of the accused and the same amounts to clear abuse of process of law insofar as the petitioners/accused are concerned, as per the observation of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Pepsi Foods Ltd v. Special Judicial Magistrate , 1998 ( 5) SCC 749 and Punjab National Bank and others v. Surendra Prasad Sinha , 1993 Supp (1) SCC 499. 9.Be that as it may, the reading of the sanction order dated 1.8.2013 enclosed at page 18 of the typed set would show that there are reasons to believe that news telecast will harm the reputation of the Social Welfare Department in the discharge of their public functions and they contain imputations which are perse defamatory against the Social Welfare Department and the same constitutes an offence under Section 499 IPC which is punishable under section 500 IPC in the court of law of competent jurisdiction. If that is so, the complaint ought to have been, as rightly argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners, filed on behalf of the Social Welfare Department. There is absolutely no complaint for defamation and sanction order in respect of Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, the Director of Social Welfare, District Collector and PA to Collector (Noon Meal Programme) etc. and the complaint filed without obtaining any sanction order for them is hence not maintainable. 10.Even otherwise, the contents of the news item are not denied to be false or factually incorrect. The truthfulness of the contents of the same is not denied. What is sought to be alleged in the complaint is that it was made with a view to denigrate the performance of the Chief Minister of the State and public servants and to defame them. However, the learned counsel for the petitioners drew the attention of this Court to the fact that the news item contains nothing about the individual performance of the Chief Minister, the Director of Social Welfare, District Collector and PA to Collector (Noon Meal Programme) and it rather speaks about the prompt action taken by the District collector in suspending two officials in-charge for the same and in issuing show cause notice to the supplier etc. What is defamatory in nature in the statement so made against the persons shown as aggrieved persons is explained neither in the complaint nor in the sanction order before this court. 11.The learned counsel for the petitioners at this juncture relied on the decision reported in (1972) 2 SCC 680 ( G.Narasimhan and others v. T.V.Chokkappa and others ), in support of his contention that no Magistrate shall take cognizance of an offence falling under Chapter XXI of the Penal Code (i.e.) sections 499 to 502 IPC except upon a complaint made by some persons aggrieved of such offence and the section is mandatory so that if a Magistrate were to take cognizance of the offence of defamation on a complaint filed by one who is not an aggrieved person, the trial and conviction of an accused in such a case by the magistrate would be void and illegal. In the instant case, when the named aggrieved persons are the Chief Minister of Tamil nadu, Director of Social Welfare, District Collector and Personal Assistant to Collector (Noon Meal Programme) and the sanction order pertains to defamation only in respect of the Social Welfare Department and not of any other official or individual, the complaint filed by the Public Prosecutor on behalf of the named aggrieved persons, who are not actually shown as aggrieved persons in the sanction order is hence not maintainable and cognizance of the offence taken by the Magistrate against the petitioners herein is void and illegal. 12.Both the learned counsel for the petitioners and the respondent have cited the decisions of Kerala High Court reported in (i)1998 Crl. LJ 3973 ( Sasikumar B. Menon v. S.Vijayan and another ) and (ii)1986 Crl.LJ 2002 ( M.P.Narayana Pillai and others v. M.P.Chacko and another ) for the legal proposition that in order to attract Explanation 2 to Section 499 IPC, an association or collection of people as such capable of being defamed, must be a definite and determinable body as then only the imputations could be said to relate to its individual members or components. However, the same is in my considerable view, not applicable to the facts of the present case, wherein the complaint is filed on behalf of the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, Director of Social Welfare, District Collector and Personal Assistant to Collector (Noon Meal Programme) and as they are identifiable. 13.However, this court, for other reasons as discussed above, is of the view that there is no due valid and sanction order for filing the complaint on behalf of the so called aggrieved persons named in the complaint and the aggrieved persons named in the sanction order and that of the complaint are different. Further, the contents of the news telecast having remained undenied, the imputation made if any is general in nature and the ingredients of section 499 IPC are not attracted and the same would render the entire proceedings to be vitiated and the proceedings initiated is also vindictive in nature. In that event, there is no justification in allowing the proceedings to continue against the petitioners, failing which it amounts to abuse of process of law and the proceedings initiated against the petitioners is hence liable to be quashed. 14.In the result, the criminal original petition is allowed and the proceedings in CC.No.6 of 2013 pending on the file of the Principal District and Sessions Judge, Vellore stands quashed insofar as the petitioners are concerned. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petitions are closed. rk Index:Yes/No Internet:Yes/No 18.07.2014 NOTE TO OFFICE: ISSUE ORDER COPY ON 12.8.2014 To 1.The Principal District and Sessions Judge, Vellore. 2.The Public Prosecutor, Vellore District, Vellore. 3.The Public Prosecutor, High court, Madras.104. K.B.K.VASUKI, J. rk Crl.O.P.No.29101 of 2013 18.7.2014