Satinderjeet Singh vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura on 12 September, 2022 IN THE COURT OF SHRI ANUJ AGRAWAL ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE-05, SOUTH EAST DISTRICT, SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI REVISION PETITION NO. 345 of 2022 CNR No.DLSE01-007677-2022 IN THE MATTER OF: Satinderjeet Singh S/o late Sh Sardar Darshan Singh, R/o B-326, DDA Janta Flat, Kalkaji, New Delhi -110019 .......Revisionist Versus 1. Rakesh Kumar Kaura, S/o Sh Jagdish Mitra, 2. Smt Sarita Kaura, W/o Sh Rakesh Kumar Kaura, Both resident of : R/o B-327, DDA Janta Flat, Kalkaji, New Delhi -110019 3. Raju, S/o Tulsi, 4. Smt Sudha, M/o Sh Raju, Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 1 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:41:08 +0530 Both resident of :- B-234, 3rd Floor, DDA Janta Flat, New Delhi ........Respondents Instituted on : 23.08.2022 Reserved on : not reserved Pronounced on : 12.09.2022 JUDGMENT 1. By way of the instant petition, revisionist takes exception to the order dated 06.05.2022, passed by Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate-06, South-East District, New Delhi in case bearing CT case No. 285 of 2021 titled as Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura, whereby Ld. Magistrate summoned the respondent no. 1 & 3 namely Rakesh Kumar Kaura and Raju for offences under section 506-II / 34 IPC only, while declining to summon them for offence u/s 268 IPC and 66E Information Technology Act. The revisionist is also aggrieved with the impugned order whereby Ld Magistrate declined to summon remaining proposed accused i.e. respondent no. 2 & 4 in the instant case. 1A. I may add herein that there is typographical error in the impugned order as instead of mentioning accused no. 1 & 3 (arrayed herein as respondent no. 1 & 3), the word 'accused no. 1 & 2' has been mentioned in the impugned order though from the order it is evident that Ld Magistrate has summoned accused no. 1 & 3 / respondent no. 1 & 3 while declining to summon remaining accused / respondent. Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 2 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:41:21 +0530 2. Brief facts as noted in the impugned order by Ld Magistrate are not in dispute and same are being reproduced hereinunder for the sake convenience :- "Briefly stating, as per the complainant, proposed accused no. 1 and 2 are his neighbours. In the year 2016, the said proposed accused persons had permitted the owner of house no. 238, to carry out illegal construction. The said construction was objected by the complainant as it was narrowing the passage of back lane gali. The complainant who was also secretary of RWA restrained the proposed accused no. 1 and 2 to carryout illegal construction and also called the police when they did not stop. Eventually, the said construction was stopped and proposed accused no.1 was asked to demolish wall of his kitchen. Due to this reason, the proposed accused no. 1 and 2 had developed animosity with the complainant and his family members and started creating nuisance inorder to harass them.3. Firstly, the proposed accused no. 1 and 2 rented out their property situated at B-234, Kalkaji, New Delhi to certain unscrupulous persons including trans genders and gunda elements in order to take revengefrom the complainant. The said tenants of the proposed accused no. 1and 2 used to carry out anti-social and immoral activities in the said house. They used to play loud music and also used to drink and smoke which were adversely affecting the physical health of his mother andeducation of his children. The complainant objected to it and also filed a police complaint. The proposed accused no. 1 and 2 abused and threatened the complainant. At the instance of proposed accused no. 1and 2, one of their tenants created nuisance in front of house of the complainant by removing their clothes. Further, proposed accused no. 3 and 4 who are tenants of proposed accused no. 1 and 2 have also created nuisance by picking up quarrel with the complainant and his family members. Proposed accused no. 1 and 2 has also installed CCTV camera facing the house of the complainant which is adversely affecting his privacy. Also, these proposed accused persons had disconnected the internet line of the house of the complainant when his daughter was giving online exam." 3. Record reveals that revisionist/complainant examined himself as CW1 in pre-summoning evidence. Record further reveals that Ld Trial Court after hearing the arguments and considering the material available on record, found insufficient material to summon the respondents for offences u/s 268 IPC and under section 66E Information Technology Act Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 3 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:41:30 +0530 observing as under :- "Summoning of proposed accused persons for the offence of nuisance 11. It is the case of complainant that the proposed accused persons have caused nuisance with an intention to annoy him by adopting different tactics. Firstly, the proposed accused no. 1 and 2 had given their property on rent to scrupulous person who used to drink and pay loud music at the said flat which caused nuisance to the complainant and his family members. Thereafter, the proposed accused no. 1 and 2 had given their property on rent to transgender who used to carry out anti-social activities at the said flat. The transgender also removed her cloth in front of the complainant at the instigation of proposed accused no. 1 and 2 in order to cause nuisance to the complainant. Thereafter, the proposed accused no.1 and 2 gave the said property on rent to gunda elements of the society i.e. proposed accused no. 3 and 4 and also installed CCTV camera and powerful mike in the balcony facing the house of complainant. 12. It should be noted that private nuisance in India is not a criminal offence. It is a civil wrong. It is public nuisance which is a criminal offence in India. Section 268 IPC provides for the offence of public nuisance. It reads as under: "268. Public nuisance.--A person is guilty of a publicnuisance who does any act or is guilty of an illegal omissionwhich causes any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public or to the people in general who dwell or occupy property in the vicinity, or which must necessarily cause injury, obstruction, danger or annoyance to persons who may have occasion to use any public right. A common nuisance is not excused on the ground that it causes some convenience or advantage." 13. Perusal of the above mentioned provision shows that public nuisance is a criminal offence only when the act or illegal omission causes common injury, danger or annoyance to the public at large or any person in the use of any public right. Proposed accused no. 1 and 2 can not be summoned for a criminal offence for giving their flat on rent to transgenders and goons elements. They also can not be summoned merely on the ground that their tenants used to drink and play loud music. 14. In the instant case, there are insufficient materials on record to even prima facie suggest that the alleged acts of the proposed accused persons have caused any common injury, danger or annoyance to the public at large. It is also not the case of complainant that the alleged acts of proposed accused persons have caused obstruction in the use of any of their public rights. 15. Hence, there are insufficient materials on record to summon the proposed accused persons for the act of alleged nuisance caused by the proposed accused persons. Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 4 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:41:41 +0530 Summoning of proposed accused persons for violation of privacy punishable u/s 66E Information Technology Act 16. It is the case of complainant that proposed accused persons have violated his privacy by installing CCTV camera in the balcony facing his house and also on the stair case. 17. Section 66E of Information Technology Act, 2000 provides for the punishment for violation of privacy. It reads as under:"Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes ortransmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with both." 18. A bare reading of the above mentioned provision clearly shows that this offence will be said to have been committed only when a person intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes or transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent. In the instant case, complainant during the PSE has not specifically deposed that the proposed accused persons have captured/published/transmitted image of his private area thereby violating his privacy. In fact, no such averment has also been made in the complaint itself. Installing CCTV camera by the proposed accused no. 1 in balcony facing the house of complainant will not automatically result in the commission of offence punishable u/s 66E IT Act unless he has actually captured image of his private area. 19. Hence, there are insufficient materials on record to summon the proposed accused persons for the alleged act of violation of privacy punishable u/s 66E IT Act." 4. The revisionist is aggrieved with the said order of the Ld. Trial Court and has assailed the impugned order on various grounds which can be summarized as under :- (i) That the impugned is against the settled principle of law and as such same is bad as well as based on conjectures, surmises and imaginations; (ii) That Ld Trial court failed to consider the evidence available on record which clearly discloses commission of cognizable offences u/s 268 IPC and 66E IT Act; Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 5 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:41:56 +0530 (iii) That Ld. Trial Court failed to consider the ATR filed by police in support of allegations of revisionist against the proposed accused; (iv) That Ld Trial court failed to consider that in order to harass the revisionist and his family, propose accused persons intentionally rented out their flat to unscrupulous person; (v) That Ld Trial Court failed to appreciate the fact that a prima facie case is made out against the propose accused on the basis of material available on record; (vi) That Ld Trial Court erred in law by not summoning the proposed accused as the facts alleged disclosed commission of cognizable offences; (vii) That Ld Trial Court passed the impugned order in haste and ignored the facts available on record; 5. Ld. Counsel for revisionist has argued on the line of grounds as mentioned in the instant revision petition. He has vehemently argued that Ld. Trial Court committed grave error in passing the impugned order as the same was passed hastly ignoring the factual matrix and materials available on record. He further argued that the material available on record is abundant to take cognizance and summon the respondents for all the offences including offences u/s 268 IPC and 66E IT Act. On the strength of these arguments, revisionist seeks setting aside of the impugned order. 6. Heard. Record perused. 7. In the matter of Taron Mohan v. State & Anr 2021 SCC OnLine Del 312 Hon'ble Delhi High Court has observed as under:- "9. The scope of interference in a revision petition is extremely narrow. It is well settled that Section 397 CrPC gives the High Courts or the Sessions Courts jurisdiction to consider the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding inter se an order and as to the regularity of the proceedings of any inferior court. It is also well settled that while considering the legality, Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 6 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:42:04 +0530 propriety or correctness of a finding or a conclusion, normally the revising court does not dwell at length upon the facts and evidence of the case. A court in revision considers the material only to satisfy itself about the legality and propriety of the findings, sentence and order and refrains from substituting its own conclusion on an elaborate consideration of evidence." 8. Further, Hon'ble Apex Court in Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan vs. Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke and others , 2015 (3) SCC 123 observed as under : "14.....Unless the order passed by the Magistrate is perverse or the view taken by the court is wholly unreasonable or there is non-consideration of any relevant material or there is palpable misreading of records, the Revisional Court is not justified in setting aside the order, merely because another view is possible. The Revisional Court is not meant to act as an appellate court.The whole purpose of the revisional jurisdiction is to preserve the power in the court to do justice in accordance with the principles of criminal jurisprudence. The revisional power of the court under Sections 397 to 401 CrPC is not to be equated with that of an appeal. Unless the finding of the court, whose decision is sought to be revised, is shown to be perverse or untenable in law or is grossly erroneous or glaringly unreasonable or where the decision is based on no material or where the material facts are wholly ignored or where the judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily or capriciously, the courts may not interfere with decision in exercise of their revisional jurisdiction." 14. In the above case also conviction of the accused was recorded, the High Court set aside the order of conviction by substituting its own view. This Court set aside the High Court's order holding that the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in substituting its views and that too without any legal basis." 9. This view has been reiterated by Hon'ble Apex Court in New India Assurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Krishna Kumar Pandey , 2019 SCC OnLine SC 1786, in the following words : Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 7 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:42:13 +0530 "8. The scope of the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court (or Sessions Court) under Section 397 Cr.P.C, is limited to the extent of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, sentence or order passed by an inferior Court. The revisional Court is entitled to look into the regularity of any proceeding before an inferior Court. As reiterated by this Court in a number of cases, the purpose of this revisionsal power is to set right a patent defect or an error of jurisdiction or law. " 10. Similar are the observations of Hon'ble High Court in Rajender Singh Thakur Vs State & Anr , Crl Rev. P. No. 155/2022, decided on 22.03.2022 and in cross case Jaspreet Singh Vs Swaneet Kukreja and Swaneet Kukreja Vs Jasmeet Singh, Crl Rev. P No. 162/2021 and Crl Rev. P No. 194/2021, both decided on 28.02.2022. 11. Therefore, in view of the settled position of law, this court in its revisional jurisdiction, is not expected to substitute its own view with that of Ld. Trial Court until and unless the order passed by Ld. Trial Court suffers from jurisdictional error or patent infirmity/illegality. In the instant case, as evident from record, Ld. Magistrate while narrating (in detail) the facts, passed a well reasoned detailed order, thereby declining to summon respondent no. 2 & 4 and declining summoning of all the respondents for offences under section 268 IPC and 66E IT Act and therefore, this court cannot and rather ought not substitute its own view with that of Ld. Trial Court (while exercising its revisional jurisdiction) and thereby arriving at a different conclusion. In my view, Ld. Magistrate has provided clear and cogent reasons for passing the impugned order and it is clearly not for this Court to second guess the decision. Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 8 of 9 Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:42:23 +0530 12. Suffice it would be to say that on the basis of statement of the revisionist, no case for summoning the respondents for offence under section 268 IPC i.e. public nuisance is made out and the facts alleged, at best, make out a case of private nuisance which is not a penal offence. In my considered view, the remedy on this count, if any, would lie with Civil Court and not with a Criminal Court. Similarly, as rightly observed by Ld Magistrate, merely by installation of CCTV cameras by respondent no.1 and 2 in their balcony (facing the house of complainant), would not automatically result in commission of offence under section 66E IT Act unless the image of private area of revisionist is captured and no such evidence was led by revisionist in this regard so as to make out a case for said offence. Therefore, in the facts and circumstance of the case, the view taken by Ld. Magistrate cannot be faulted with. Ld. Counsel for revisionist has failed to point out any patent illegality/ infirmity or jurisdictional error in the impugned order and therefore, present petition is liable to be dismissed. 13. With these observations, it is held that there is no patent illegality, impropriety or jurisdictional error in the impugned order. Accordingly, the revision petition stands dismissed. 14. TCR be sent back to the Ld. Trial court along with copy of this judgment. Revision file be consigned to Record Room after due compliance. Digitally signed by ANUJ ANUJ AGRAWAL Announced in the open AGRAWAL Date: 2022.09.12 11:42:31 +0530 Court on 12th September, 2022 (ANUJ AGRAWAL) Additional Sessions Judge-05, South East, Saket Courts, New Delhi Crl Rev. No. 345/2022 Satinderjeet Singh Vs Rakesh Kumar Kaura & Ors Page No. 9 of 9