Hosapete Abubakar vs M A Kasim Musliyar on 12 April, 2023 Author: P.N.Desai Bench: P.N.Desai -1- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU DATED THIS THE 12TH DAY OF APRIL, 2023 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE P.N.DESAI CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1265 OF 2012 BETWEEN: HOSAPETE ABUBAKAR AGED ABOUT 65 YEARS S/O. MOHAMMED DERLAKATTE, MANGALORE. ...APPELLANT (BY SRI ISMAIL MUNEEB MUSBA, ADVOCATE) AND: 1. M.A. KASIM MUSLIYAR AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS S/O. ABDUL REHMAN MUSLIYAR R/O. ANSAR MANZIL POST MUGRAL Digitally signed by KASARGOD DISTRICT. NAGARATHNA M Location: HIGH COURT OF 2. B.K. ABDUL KADER MUSLIYAR KARNATAKA AGED ABOUT 45 YEARS S/O. MOHAMMED HAJI R/O. BEDRAKAD HOUSE KODUNGAL, BANTWAL TALUK WORKING AT BUMBRAN JUMA MASJID POST KUMBRAN, KUMBLE KASARGOD. ...RESPONDENTS (BY SRI SHRAVAN BHARADVAJ, ADVOCATE FOR SRI B.S. SACHIN, ADVOCATE) -2- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 THIS CRL.A. IS FILED U/S.378(4) CR.P.C BY THE ADVOCATE FOR THE APPELLANT PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE ORDER OF ACQUITTAL DATED 13.09.2012 PASSED BY THE JMFC. (III COURT), MANGALORE, IN C.C. NO.1047/2008 - ACQUITTING THE RESPONDENT/ACCUSED FOR THE OFFENCE PUNISHABLE UNDER SECTION 500 AND 501 OF IPC . THIS APPEAL COMING ON FOR FURTHER DICTATION, THIS DAY, THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING: JUDGMENT This appeal arises out of judgment of acquittal passed by JMFC (III Court), Mangalore, D.K., dated 13.09.2012 in C.C.No.1047/2008, wherein the learned JMFC acquitted accused Nos.1 and 2 for the offences punishable under Sections 500 and 501 of Indian Penal Code (for short hereinafter referred to as ' IPC '). 2. In brief the case of the prosecution is that the appellant/complainant is a respectable person and is a philanthropist and a social worker. The appellant was also the President of Derlakatte Mosque Trust. It is further contended that knowing fully well regarding the position and status of the complainant, the accused persons got published defamatory articles against the complainant in -3- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 'Jaya Kiran' newspaper at page No.3 on 13.05.2006 stating that the complainant has tortured his own father and also attempted to murder his own father. It is contended that by this imputation, the complainant was defamed in the society. In this regard, the complainant issued legal notice to the editor, printer and publisher of the newspaper regarding the defamatory articles published by them and later a case was registered against printer and publisher of the said newspaper in C.C.No.3878/2006. Thereafter the printer and publisher of said newspaper appeared before the court and filed a memo stating that the said imputations were made by the Musliyars i.e., the accused in this case. Then the publisher and printer of Jaya Kiran newspaper published another publication on 07.08.2007 under the caption "Hosapete Abubakkaaravara Hesaru Kedisuva Shadyantra" and expressed their regret for having edited, printed and published the said defamatory imputation supplied by the said musliyars. The complainant accepted the regret of the editor, printer and publisher and subsequently sought permission to withdraw -4- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 the complaint filed against the printer, publisher and editor of Jaya Kiran newspaper. Subsequently, when the complainant came to know that it was the accused who gave the malicious imputations in the newspaper against the appellant, filed a private complaint under Section 200 of Code of Criminal Procedure (for short hereinafter referred to as ' Cr.P.C .') for the offence under Sections 500 and 501 of IPC against them. 3. Thereafter, he got himself as PW.1 and four more witnesses have been examined as PWs.2 to 5 and got marked sixteen documents as Exs.P1 to P16. After completing the trial and hearing the arguments, learned JMFC acquitted the accused and hence, the complainant has challenged the said acquittal in this appeal. 4. Heard Sri. Ismail Muneeb Musba, learned counsel appearing for the appellant and Sri. Shravan Bharadavaj for Sri. B.S.Sachin, learned counsel appearing for the respondents. -5- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 5. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that judgment of acquittal passed by the Trial Court is contrary to the law, facts and evidence on record. The Trial Court has failed to formulate proper points for consideration and has erroneously acquitted the accused and the same is not just and proper. The publication of the said article in 'Jaya Kiran' newspaper has drastically affected the image of the appellant in the eyes of common man in the society. The imputation has been made with an intention to harm the reputation of the appellant and knowing fully well that such publication will damage the reputation of the appellant. Further that the intention by the accused to cause harm is the most essential 'sina qua non' of the offence under Section 499 of IPC. 6. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the malicious imputation published covers all the basic ingredients of defamation as the statement published was totally false. The Trial Court failed to consider the motive by the accused in making the malicious imputation against -6- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 the appellant. The Trial Court has failed to realize the mental trauma and agony undergone by the appellant. The learned JMFC ought to have placed reliance on the evidence of PWs.2 and 3, former reporter and editor of the Jaya Kirana, Kannada newspaper who have stated that two accused came to the office along with one Ismail Shafti and it was on their request that article was published. The Trial Court has failed to scrutinize and appreciate the evidence on record by adopting the standards adopted by the judicial forums. On the other hand, the Trial Court without considering the effect of cross-examination straight way proceeded to accept the evidence in examination-in-chief, without proper scrutiny. Learned JMFC failed to realize that the evidence of the prosecution witnesses discloses that it is the accused persons who requested the PWs.2 and 3, former reporter and editor to publish the said article. The learned counsel argued that the Trial Court has failed in applying the principles propounded in Exception 4 stated to the Section 499 of IPC. The said imputation harmed the reputation of -7- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 the appellant. The learned counsel argued that the complainant has also examined two independent witnesses about reputation of the complainant and damage to his reputation. The Trial Court without appreciating the same and without considering the oral and documentary evidence, and without properly appreciating the materials on record has wrongly acquitted the accused. On the other hand, the complainant by his own evidence and examining two more witnesses on his behalf and documentary evidence has proved the ingredients of the offence under Sections 499 and 501 of IPC. Therefore, as there is no proper appreciation of evidence, the judgment of acquittal being erroneous has resulted in miscarriage of justice. Learned counsel for the appellant in support of his contention relied on the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mohd. Abdulla Khan Vs. Prakash K reported in (2018) 1 SCC 615 wherein at paragraph No.22 the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under: "22. K.M.Mathew Vs. K.A.Abraham , (2002) 6 SCC 670 has nothing to do with the question -8- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 of vicarious liability. The argument in K.M. Mathew case was that in view of Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 only the Editor of a newspaper could be prosecuted for defamation. Such a submission was rejected holding that Section 7 does not create any immunity in favour of persons other than the Editor of a newspaper. It only creates a reubttable presumption that the persons whose name is shown as the Editor of the newspaper is responsible for the choice and publication of the material in the newspaper. K.M. Mathew case made it clear that if a complaint contains allegations (which if proved would constitute defamation), person other than the one who is declared to be the editor of the newspapers can be prosecuted if they are alleged to be responsible for the publication of such defamatory material." 7. He has also relied on the judgment of High Court of Bombay in the case of Muncherji Nusserwanji Cama Vs. The State of Maharashtra - Criminal Application No.97/2019 dated 18.11.2019 and he has referred to paragraph No.9 and the same reads as under: -9- CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 "9. As far as liability is concerned, primarily a reporter is responsible for his act of defamation and vicarious responsibility is fastened only on the printer, publisher and editor of the newspaper, unless the contrary is proved. Having regard to the judicial pronouncements in this regard, it can safely be said that besides persons declared as editor, printer and publisher of a newspaper, only such persons could be prosecuted for an action of defamation against whom specific and clear allegations have been made in the complaint that either he was responsible for selection of the defamatory matter or had personal knowledge about the contents of the defamatory matter. In addition, it must also be averred in the complaint that such person had the intention to harm or had knowledge or reason to believe that the imputation will harm the reputation of the complainant. A perusal of the complaint filed by the respondent No.3 contains specific allegations against the applicants." With these arguments, learned counsel prayed to set aside the judgment of acquittal. - 10 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 8. Against this, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the Trial Court has rightly considered the evidence and has given reasons and held that there is nothing to show that the respondents/accused have given any such information. On the other hand, the evidence discloses that these accused are not knowing the printer, publisher or owner of the newspaper. The article itself does not indicate anything that these accused who have given the information to publish the same in the newspaper. Subsequently, editor, publisher and owner of the said paper have named these persons, only to escape their liability and somehow tried to close the case against them. There is no material to show that these accused have committed the offences as alleged. Learned counsel for the respondents argued that the judgment of acquittal is supported by reasons. Hence, he prayed to dismiss the appeal. - 11 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 9. I have perused the appeal memorandum, impugned judgment of acquittal and also the evidence on record. 10. In order to attract the offence under Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code (for short 'the IPC ') i.e., defamation firstly, the words must be defamatory; secondly, they must refer to the aggrieved party; thirdly, they must be maliciously published. The section is having four explanations and ten exceptions. The explanation amplify the scope of the section whereas the exceptions take out certain things out of application of the section. In order to constitute an offence of defamation, the essential ingredient is to make an imputation, concerning any person, with an intention to harm or with a knowledge or reason that such imputation will harm the reputation of such person. An imputation without an intention to harm or without knowing or having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of such person will not constitute an - 12 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 offence of defamation. The punishment is prescribed under Section 500 of IPC. 11. It is relevant to state here that the complainant has alleged an offence under Section 501 of IPC. However, the said Section is not applicable to the accused/respondents. The accused are neither publishers nor editors or owner of newspaper. Therefore, what is required to be noticed is whether the alleged offence against the respondents in the evidence indicates an offence under Section 499 of IPC. 12. According to the evidence of PW.1, he knew very well that accused nos.1 and 2 i.e., the respondents were working as Musliyars in Kasargod Masjid and Umran Jumma Masjid of Kumble respectively. They were also collecting money for construction of Madarasa. He has also stated that there was misunderstanding between himself and the accused as he had advised them that collection of amount for construction of Madarasa was not proper. He has deposed that the accused persons for the said reason - 13 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 got published an article in 'Jai Kiran' Kannada daily newspaper stating that the complainant tried to kill his father by running the Car over him and therefore, the villagers developed bad opinion about him and he was defamed. Hence, he had filed complaint against the printer and publisher of Jai Kiran newspaper. Since the printer and publisher gave explanation and regretted for the same, the complaint was withdrawn. However, the printer and publisher informed that it was published at the instance of the accused who are respondents in this appeal. Hence, he has lodged the complaint against present accused. His cross examination shows that accused no.2 is none other his sister's son. Both are known to him. He admits in the cross examination that he asked the accused to show the place of construction of Madarasa and they took him to the place and he has given Rs.5,00,000/- in the year 2004 for construction of Madarasa in Kumbra of Puttur Taluk. He has stated that Kumbra is a trust belonging to Karnataka Islamic Academy. He was the Vice President of Karnataka Islamic - 14 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 Academy. Accused no.1 was the Secretary and accused no.2 was also the member of the said trust. There was some misunderstanding between himself and President of the said trust and he has also not attended the said trust activities for last 4 to 5 years. According to him he has given Rs.13,70,000/- to the President of the said trust. He has admitted that the accused persons are neither publisher nor editor of the newspaper. He has also admitted about filing of the case against the printer and the publisher of Jai Kiran newspaper and settlement of the matter. He has also admitted that he has lodged a complaint against these accused at Konaje Police Station and also lodged complaints at Bantwal and Ullal. He has also lodged a complaint against the accused in Musliyars Society at Kerala but he do not know whether police have filed 'B' report in this regard. He has stated that the accused in CC No.3878/2006 who are the printer and publisher in Jai Kiran newspaper have revealed the name of the accused/respondents herein, and hence, he has lodged the complaint. - 15 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 13. After perusing the evidence, it is evident that that there is nothing in his evidence to show that with an intention to harm his reputation or impute at the instance of these accused article was published in the said 'Jai Kiran' newspaper. Merely because the article was published by somebody attributing certain utterness to any person and only at the say of this printer and publisher, the accused/respondents herein cannot be prosecuted unless it is shown that the said article was published concerning imputation at the instance of these respondents. It must be shown that such imputation was made directly or indirectly to lower moral or intellectual character of that person or lower the credit of that person. But nothing is stated by the complainant. On the other hand, they were known to each other, one of the accused is his relative and they were members of the trust. The accused are also religious teachers in their community. He has lodged a complaint against them to police and also at different places and therefore, the complainant is having ill will and enmity against the accused. His evidence requires - 16 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 corroboration and it is not safe to base conviction only on his interested version. 14. I have perused the evidence of PW.2 - Reporter of Jai Kiran newspaper. He has deposed that in the year 2006, they had published the article against the complainant titled as 'Maulvigalibbarige Jeeva Bedarike' which is marked as Ex.P3. According to PW.2, the accused had come to their printing press with one Ismail Shafi and they have given information for publication of the said article. He has admitted that the printer and publisher have expressed their regret and the case was withdrawn against them. His cross examination shows that he does not know the whereabouts of the accused. He has no record to show that he was the printer or publisher of the said paper. He has not produced his licence. He does not know that Hospete Aboobakkar belongs to which place. He knew Ismail Shafi who brought the accused persons to the office. It is admitted that the article was published stating that it has came to the notice from public that complainant - 17 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 tried to kill his father by running the Car over him. He has admitted that they will verify authenticity of the news before publishing any news. On what basis, he has published the said news is not forthcoming. There is absolutely nothing to show that the accused persons have requested him to publish the said article. It appears that just to escape the liability from the case filed against printer and publisher of Jai Kiran newspaper, they have simply named the accused persons without any basis. 15. PW.3 is the Editor of the said newspaper. He has also stated about the publication of the said news in the newspaper. According to him, the said news was given by one Ismail Shafi but the said person is not made as an accused in the present case. His cross examination also reveals that he has not verified the authenticity of the said news. He does not know the accused except Ismail Shafi. It is not mentioned that it was published at the instruction or information received from the accused. When he does not know the accused and the said Ismail Shafi who has - 18 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 given information is not made a party, his evidence will not help to show that the accused persons were responsible for publication of the said article. 16. PW.4 and PW.5 are the witnesses to state about the reputation of the complainant. They do not have any information as to how this article was published. According to these two witnesses, the defamatory portion is that the complainant tried to kill his father. 17. I have also perused Ex.P3 - defamatory article. It is evident from the said article published in Jai Kiran newspaper that the accused persons have lodged a complaint to the Superintendent of Police, Kasargod regarding threatening of the accused persons by the complainant over phone and has hatched a criminal conspiracy. It is also stated in the newspaper that it was heard from the public that the complainant earlier tried to kill his father by running the Car over him. Therefore, on perusing the said defamatory article what can be said is that the complainant tried to kill his father according to - 19 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 the publication and the same was heard from the public whereas the accused have not informed the PW2 or PW3 that the complainant tried to kill his father. On the other hand, it is also evident that the complainant has lodged the complaint against the accused persons at different places and moreover they are relatives and there is ill will between them. Therefore, the evidence of the complainant and his witnesses does not show that the accused were responsible for publication of the said article. There is no basis for publication of the said article by the publisher and printer of the said newspaper. Now, it appears just to escape the punishment for defamation, the printer and publisher of Jai Kiran newspaper have blamed the accused. When either the printer or publisher of the newspaper does not know whereabouts of the accused persons, on what basis they had published the said article is not forthcoming. They knew only about one Ismail Shafi whereas he is not the accused in the present case. The accused persons have not given any written letter, article or material for publication in the said newspaper and there - 20 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 is nothing to show that the said article was published at the instance of the accused. Absolutely, there is no basis to show that the accused persons have supplied any information and/or given information or at their behest, this article was published. Merely because the printer and publisher names the accused, they cannot be held responsible unless there is any evidence to show that the said article was published at the instance of the accused with an intention to harm the reputation of the complainant or lower his reputation in the eyes of public. Merely because some article is published against the complainant, the accused cannot be held liable for the same. It is the printer and publishers who were responsible for publication of the article. However, the complainant has withdrawn the case against them and at their instance, the complainant has lodged the complaint against present accused. There is nothing to show that the accused with an intention tried to harm or lower the reputation of the complainant. - 21 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 18. The entire evidence of the complainant would clearly show that there is no legally admissible evidence to show that the accused are responsible for publication of the said article against the complainant. The main allegation that the complainant tried to kill his father was published in the newspaper as it was heard from general public whereas the said information was not received from the accused persons. Absolutely, there is no ground to show that the accused have committed the offence as alleged. 19. The learned Judge of trial court after considering the entire evidence on record has come to the conclusion that the complainant/appellant has failed to prove the guilt and the evidence of the complainant creates a doubt. Hence trial court has given benefit of doubt. to the accused and acquitted them. 20. The decision relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant of High Court of Judicature at Bombay in Muncherji Nusserwanji Cama & Another vs. The - 22 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 State of Maharashtra & Another in Criminal Application No.97/2019 (DD 18.11.2019) will not help the appellant as there is no dispute about the proposition laid down therein. On the other hand, if paragraph 9 of the judgment is perused, then the said judgment will not help the complainant. On the other hand, in the present case, there is no evidence to show that the accused persons are responsible for publication of defamatory matter, and they had personal knowledge about it. 21. The decision relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant in Mohd. Abdulla Khan vs. Prakash K. [(2018)1 SCC 615] will also not help the complainant in view of the evidence on record. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has referred to another decision in K.M.Mathew v. K.A.Abraham [(2002)6 SCC 670] regarding Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 wherein the Chief Editor of the newspaper could be prosecuted for defamation. It also shows that the persons other than Editor of newspaper can also be prosecuted. According to - 23 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 the complainant, in the present case, the information was given by Ismail Shafi. He is not the accused before this Court and there is nothing to show at the behest of the accused, this article was published. Though the principles stated in the above decision regarding the ingredients of constitution of offence under Sections 499 , 500 , 501 and 502 of IPC are not at all disputed, the offence of defamation is not proved by the complainant by his own evidence or evidence of other witnesses. Therefore , the said decision will also not help the Appellant/complainant. 22. It is settled principles of law that this Court being an Appellate Court will not interfere in the judgment of acquittal unless it is shown that the judgment of acquittal is perverse, erroneous and the same is not based on proper appreciation of evidence on record. In the light of the above principles, if the present judgment of acquittal and the evidence are considered, in my considered view, there is no ground to show that the judgment of acquittal has resulted in miscarriage of - 24 - CRL.A No. 1265 of 2012 justice. Therefore, the appeal being devoid of merits and is liable to be dismissed. 23. Accordingly, I pass the following: ORDER (i) The appeal is hereby dismissed. (ii) The judgment of acquittal dated 13.09.2012 passed by the JMFC (III Court), Mangalore, D.K. in CC No.1047/2008 is hereby confirmed. (iii) The bail bonds, if any, executed by the accused stand cancelled. (iv) Registry to send back the records to the trial court. (v) No order as to costs. Sd/- JUDGE HJ/hkh.