Sh. Raman Chandiok vs Mr. Mahendra Seth on 4 September, 2010 1 IN THE COURT OF SH. B. S. CHUMBAK, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE:DLEHI Case ID Number 02402R0069082010 Criminal Revision No. 10/10/10 Assigned to Sessions 12/03/10 Arguments heard on 09/08/10 Date of order 04/09/10 IN THE MATTER OF: SH. RAMAN CHANDIOK R/O FLAT NO. C-19/X-2, DILSHAD GARDEN, DELHI-110095 ....PETITIONER VS. 1. MR. MAHENDRA SETH 2. MRS. ARVINDER SETH 3. MRS. SUCHI CHANDIOK ALL R/O 6/319, GEETA COLONY DELHI-110031 ...RESPONDENTS ORDER: 1. Sh. Raman Chandiok revisionist petitioner r/o flat no. C-19/X-2 Dilshad Garden, Delhi has filed the revision petition u/s 397 Cr.P.C against the impugned order dated 19.02.10 of Ld. MM by virtue of which a criminal 2 complaint u/s 500 / 501 / 34 IPC filed by the petitioner against Mahender Seth, Mrs. Arvinder Seth and Mrs. Suchi Chandiok all r/o 6/319, Geeta Colony, Delhi (hereinafter referred to as respondent no. 1,2 and 3 respectively) was dismissed. 2. Brief facts germinates to file the present revision petition are that the elder son of petitioner namely Tarun Chandiok was got married with Ms. Suchi on 2nd day of May 2009 at Delhi as per Hindu Rites and ceremonies. Respondent no.3 started behaving arrogantly with her husband (elder son of petitioner) and his other family members. The behaviour of respondent no.3 and her husband polluted the healthy atmosphere of his family which had become intolerable. Ultimately petitioner was constrained to intervene on 29.09.09 when the conflict between Tarun Chandiok (Son of petitioner) and respondent no.3 (daughter in law) of the petitioner forced his son to call respondent no.1 (father respondent no.3) to pacify the situation and on that day respondent no.1 father of respondent no.3 used abnoxious words and said to Tarun Chandiok that : "Mai kisi ke baap ka nokar nahi hu", "pour kerosene on her and burn her (respondent no.3) " and ultimately on 5.10.09 respondent no.3 with the assistance of her husband shifted to their new residence i.e flat no. 504, Gaur Ganga II Apartment, Vaishali and due to their said behaviour petitioner and his wife 3 broke all ties with them. 1. It is further averred that inspite of living separately, on 18.10.09 Tarun Chandiok (son of petitioner) brought her wife to PS and lodged a complaint against her and her parents. Sh. K.L. Sindhwani friend of petitioner and Sh. Suresh Kapoor brother in law of petitioner also visited P.S. M.S. Park on that day on the request of Varun Chandiok second son of petitioner. It is also stated that petitioner and his wife did not go there as they had already broken all ties with them. 2. It is further averred that on seeing Varun Chandiok, Suresh Kapoor and K.L. Sindhwani respondent no.3 (Suchi) started abusing Mr. Tarun Chandiok and his parents in filthy and un-parliamentary language with the intention to lower down the reputation of petitioner in the society. Respondent no.2 (mother of respondent no.3) also publicly abused outside the gate of P.S. Mansarover Park referring the name of Tarun Chandiok that : "kamino ke pure khandan ko badnam kar dungi kahi muh dikhane laike nahi rahega." Respondent no.1 also publicly stated referring to Tarun Chandiok that : "saale kute ne meri beti ke khilaf police station mein complaint ki hai, ab mai in kuton ko batauga aur kamino ko dowry ke 4 case me ghasetonga. Sale ke baap (Raman Chandiok) ko society mee badnam kar dounga lalchhi sale, daheje mangta hai" and while pointing out towards Varun Chandiok he stated that "or beete teri to shaddi nahi hone dunga. "kaminoo ke ghar pe jaloos nikalunga muzhe jante nahi hai". 5. Respondent no.3 said publicly at the gate of P.S Mansarover Park stated that: "complaint hame bhi karni aati hai ab main inhe battaun gi ki complaint kaise ki jati hai. She repeatedly shouted while pointing towards petitioner and his wife that inhone meri jindgi barbad kar di hai, mera sir far ke phake kar chala gya. Kya hamari koi izzat nahi hai, yaha rehte hue bhi mera jeena haram kar rakha tha inhone and respondent no.2 (mother of respondent no.3) further stated that logo dekho kutto ne meri beti ka sir fad kar fank diya, inhone hamara jeena haram kar diya hai." 6. The aforesaid conduct of the respondents lower down the reputation of petitioner in the society and also in the eyes of his friends which can be inferred from the fact that Sh. K.L. Sindhwani (friend of petitioner) on 18.10.09 asked from Varun Chandiok that: "beta tell me honestly did your father and or your brother ever ask for any sort of thing from Suchi or her parents" 5 7. By feeling aggrieved and disgusted due to the aforesaid misbehaviour of the respondents the petitioner herein filed a complaint u/s 200 of Cr.P.C in the court of Ld. ACMM, which was assigned to the court of Sh. Ankur Jain, Ld. MM for trial. 8. Ld. MM after taking cognizance of the complaint fixed the case for recording statement of complainant as well as of other witnesses. 9. Complainant was examined as CW1 and he deposed more over less same as stated in the complaint. Sh. K.L. Sindhwani appeared as CW2 and in his affidavit in para no.4 deposed that respondent kept on shouting and stated that "saale kute ne meri beti ke khilaf police station mein complaint ki hai, ab mai in kuton ko batauga aur kamino ko dowry ke case me ghasetonga. Sale ke baap (Raman Chandiok) ko society mee badnam kar dounga lalchhi sale, daheje mangta hai" and further told to Varun Chandiok that "beete teri to shaddi nahi hone dunga." He further stated that on 01.02.10 at about 2:15 a.m he received a call from Smt. Tripti daughter of complainant informing thereby that respondents were creating nuisance at the residence of complainant (petitioner herein) and respondent no.2 was shouting very loudly that "hamari ladki tabha ho gai hai sir faad ke sut gai ne." 6 10. CW3 corroborated the testimony of CW2 and he stated more over less the same which is stated by CW1 and CW2. 11. CW4 deposed that on 18.10.09 on receipt of a call from his father (petitioner herein) he went to PS M.S. Park and saw respondent no.2 stating at the gate of P.S M.S. Park that "kamino ke pure khandan ko badnam kar dungi kahi muh dikhane laike nahi rahega". Father of respondent no.3 stated that "sale kute ne meri beti ke khilaf police station mein complaint ki hai, ab mai in kuton ko batauga, kamino ko dowry ke case mei ghasetonga, sale ke baap ko society mee badnam kar doonga lalchhi salla, daheja mangta hai". He further stated that "bete teri to shadi nahi hone doonga kamino ke ghar jaloos nikalunga mujhe jante nahi. 12. Sh. Virender Sood appeared as PW5 and deposed that respondent no.1 told to the complainant that "I see to it how you reach to C.P. Ghar se toh nikal ke phik vadunga". 13. On the basis of aforesaid statement of complainant and witnesses and after hearing arguments on behalf of Ld. counsel for both the parties Ld. MM passed the impugned order dated 19.2.10 observing therein as under : "In my opinion, this is not a fit case where accused 7 could be summoned for the offence u/s 500 / 501 / 34 IPC and the allegations which have been levelled are at best abuses and un-parliamentary languages used by the respondents in anger. It is further observed that there is no imputations and no case of defamation is made out against the accused and allegations which have been leveled in the complaint does not tantamount to defamation and accordingly, the compliant was dismissed." 14. After feeling aggrieved by the impugned order the present revision petition is filed and assailed the same on the following grounds: (a) Ld. trail court erroneously appreciated the evidence in isolation and not in its entirety therefore erroneously concluded that there were no imputations. (b) Ld. Trial court failed to appreciate the gravity of the aspersion cast by the respondents whereby the petitioner and his family members were projected as a greedy person and in view of the grounds mentioned in the revision petition requested for set aside the order dated 19.02.10 and to direct the MM to issue process against the respondents to face trial. 15. After hearing arguments on the point of consideration of revision petition trial court record was summoned and notice of the revision petition was also directed to be served upon the respondents. In pursuant to the notice all the respondents appeared and they also filed their reply to the revision petition 8 and case was fixed for further arguments. 16. I have heard the arguments on behalf of petitioner as well as counsel for respondents. 17. Petitioner himself argued the matter and submitted that petitioner inspires august respect and confidence from its neighbourhood and aforesaid ugly demonstration by the respondent no.3 and her family members i.e respondent no.1 and 2 at the odd hours of the night is in itself amounts to imputations and aforesaid conduct of the respondents cannot be said to have not been leveled for lowering down the reputation of petitioner in the eyes of the people residing in the vicinity. It is further contended that the allegations with regard to that elder son of petitioner slammed the head of the respondent no.3 and ran away, alone is sufficient to attract the ingredients of imputation and also placed his reliance on a decided case cited as Bashir-Ul-Haq Vs. State of West Bengal AIR 1953 SC 293; Kirti Jain @ Shalu Jain and another Crl. M.C. No. 3847-48/2005 decided on 15.11.06; Prabhu Chawla Vs. A.U. Sheriff 1995 Crl. LJ 1922; Hari Das and another Vs. State of W.B. and others AIR 1964 SC 1773; Amar Singh Vs. K.S. Badalia 1965 (2) Crl. L.J. 693 and Ashok Kumar Vs. Radha Kishan Vij 1983 Crl. LJ 48. 9 18. Petitioner also placed his reliance on a decided case cited as M.N. Damani Vs. S.K. Sinha AIR 2001 Supreme Court 2037 wherein it is observed as under: "As regards the allegations made against the appellant in the complaint filed in the court of Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, at Nasik, on a reading of the complaint we do not think that we will be justified at this stage to quash that complaint. It is not the province of this court to appreciate at this stage the evidence or scope of and meaning of the statement. Certain allegations came to be made but whether these allegations do constitute defamation of the Marwari community as a business class and whether the appellant had intention to cite as an instance of general feeling among the community and whether the context in which the said statement came to be made, as is sought to be argued by the learned senior counsel for the appellant, are all matters to be considered by the learned Magistrate at a later stage." It is further observed that : "At this stage, we cannot embark upon weighing the evidence and come to any conclusion to hold, whether or not the allegations made in the complaint constitute an offence punishable under section 500 ." It is further observed that : "It is the settled legal position that a court has to read the complaint as a whole and find out whether allegations disclosed constitute an offence u/s 499 triable by the Magistrate. The 10 Magistrate prima facie came to the conclusion that the allegations might come within the definition of 'defamation' under section 499 , IPC and could be taken cognizance of. But these are the facts to be established at the trial. The case set up by the appellant are either defences open to be taken or other steps of framing a charge at the trial at whatever stage known to law." It is further observed that : "At this stage it is not a case warranting quashing of the complaint filed in the court of Judicial Magistrate." 19. In view of the imputations as alleged and the observations given by their lordships in the aforesaid decided case petitioner submitted that it is a fit case of issuing process against the respondents for the offence u/s 500 IPC and requested for set aside the impugned order dated 19.02.2010 passed by Ld. MM. 20. On the contrary Ld. counsel on behalf of respondents submitted that no ingredients to disclose the offence of defamation as provided u/s 499 IPC are brought on record by the petitioner in his complaint filed by him u/s 200 of Cr.P.C in the court of Ld. MM and Ld. MM after hearing arguments and appreciating the material brought on record rightly dismissed the complaint with the observation that there is no imputations and no case of defamation against the respondents is made out and also placed their reliance on a 11 decided case cited as Parkash Devi and others Vs. State of Delhi and another Crl. M.C. No. 2626/09 decided on 05.02.10 and requested for dismissal of the revision petition. 21. After hearing arguments on behalf of Ld. counsel for both the parties and considering the averments mentioned in the complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C filed by revisionist/petitioner in the court of Ld. MM and is of the considered view that following issues are required to be determined by this court :- (a) Whether the words allegedly said to Tarun Chandiok by respondent no.1 as mentioned in para no.5 of the complaint i.e "Mai kisi ke baap ka nokar nahi hu" to Tarun Chandiok and further said "pour kerosene on her and burn her" amount to imputation qua the petitioner Raman Chandiok. (b) Whether the words allegedly said by respondent no.3 (in the absence of petitioner) i.e outside the gate of P.S. Mansarover Park as mentioned in para no.11 of the complaint while referring to Mrs. Tarun Chandiok that ""kamino ke pure khandan ko badnam kar dungi khai muh dikhane laike nahi rahega" amount to imputation qua petitioner Raman Chandiok. ( c) Whether the words allegedly used by respondent no.1 (in the absence of petitioner) i.e outside the gate of P.S. Mansarover Park while referring to Tarun Chandiok "saale kute ne meri beti ke khilaf police station 12 mein complaint ki hai, ab mai in kuton ko batauga aur kamino ko dowry ke case me ghasetonga. Sale ke baap (Raman Chandiok) ko society mee badnam kar dounga lalchhi sale, daheje mangta hai" as well as "our beete teri to shaddi nahi hone dunga" while pointing towards Varun Chandiok amounts to imputation qua petitioner Raman. (d) Whether the words allegedly used by respondent no.3 (in the absence of petitioner) at the gate of P.S. Mansarover Park on 18.10.09 as mentioned in para no.13 of the complaint that "complaint hame bhi karni aati hai ab main inhe battaun gi ki complaint kaise ki jati hai" amounts to imputation qua the petitioner. (e) Whether the fact mentioned in para 13 of the petition that respondent no.3 lodged a false complaint against Chandiok family therein imputing the complainant and his other family members with the allegation of physical torture of respondent no.3 and for demand of dowry of Rs.50 lacs for purchasing a plot amounts to imputation qua the petitioner Raman Chandiok. (f) Whether the question raised by Sh. K.L. Sindhwani on 18.10.09 to younger son of petitioner such as "Beta, tell me honestly did your father and or your brother ever ask for any sort of thing from Suchi or her parents" amounts to lowering down the reputation of the petitioner in the society or not. 22. Before deciding all the aforesaid issues I have to discuss the provisions 13 of section 499 of IPC which reads thus :- "Defamation - Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person. Explanation 1 - It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person of living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2 - It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3 - An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4 - No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful." 23. In view of the ingredients as provided u/s 499 IPC and the explanations appended herewith I carefully perused the facts and circumstances under 14 which the petitioner and respondents were undergoing wherein it transpires that respondent no.3 Mr. Suchi was got married with the son of elder son of petitioner on 02.05.09 and in para no.4 of the petition it is mentioned that soon after the son of petitioner's son namely Tarun Chandiok becoming Judicial Officer respondent no.3 wife of son of petitioner started behaving arrogantly with her husband and other family members which is described as "cold war" by the petitioner and he also mentioned that such behaviour of respondent no.3 polluted the healthy and homely atmosphere of the family which had become intolerable. 24. In para no.5 of the petition it is mentioned that petitioner was constrained to intervene on 29.09.09 when the conflict between his son and daughter in law forced his son to call respondent no.1 to pacify the situation and on that day respondent no.3 allegedly used the words "Mai kisi ke baap ka nokar nahi hu" to Tarun Chandiok and further said "pour kerosene on her and burn her" and in the last line of para no.5 it is further mentioned that the evil designs of respondent no.3 culminated with the assistance of her husband on 5.10.09 when they shifted to their new residence i.e flat no. 504, Gaur Ganga II, Apartment, Vaishali. The mentioning of the aforesaid incidents clearly goes to show that there were no cordial relationship between both the parties and in such circumstances and incompatible atmosphere which appears on the face 15 of the complaint itself, the possibility of aggregating situation among both the parties cannot be ruled out and in such circumstances the aforesaid words if used by respondent no.3 appears to be used under the impulse of anger cannot be held as imputation. 25. The allegations as alleged in issue no. (b) to (f), contents of para no.8 of the complaint are sufficient to decide all the aforesaid issues as petitioner himself stated that one of his friend namely Sh. K.L. Sindhwani and his brother in law namely Suresh Kapoor visited the P.S. Mansarover Park on the request of his younger son Varun Chandiok who had been called by his son Tarun Chandiok. The petitioner and his wife did not intend to go there as they had already broken all ties with them which clearly goes to show that there were strained relations between the petitioner and respondents and on perusal of the complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C it has become crystal clear that atmosphere in the petitioner's family was not compatible and considering the relationship of son and daughter in law, father in law and daughter in law, son in law and father in law it cannot be said that the words allegedly spoken by the respondents as mentioned in the complaint amounts to imputation, therefore, Ld. MM while decided the criminal complaint vide his order dated 19.02.10 rightly held that this is not a fit case where accused could be summoned u/s 500 / 501 / 34 IPC and the allegations which have been leveled are at the best 16 abuses and unparliamentary languages used by the respondents in anger. 26. It is further transpires that whatever stated or spoken by respondent on 18.10.09 is spoken while referring either to Mr. Tarun Chandiok or to Mr. Varun Chandiok and both are neither the petitioners nor the complainants in this case, therefore, petitioner have no locus standi to file the present case on the basis of incident dated 18.10.09 reliance is also placed on sub section (1) of section 199 of Cr.P.C which is as follows : "Prosecution for defamation - (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under Chapter XX1 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) except upon a complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence. Provided that where such person is under the age of eighteen years, or is an idiot or a lunatic, or is from sickness or infirmity unable to make a complaint, or is a woman who, according to the local customs and manners, ought not to be compelled to appear in public, some other person may, with the leave of the court, make a complaint on his or her behalf." 27. Reliance is also placed on a decided case cited as Nazeem Bavakunju Vs. State of Kerala and others 1988 Crl.L.J. 487 wherein it is held that : " Section 199 , Cr.P.C restricts the powers of the court in taking cognizance of offence except upon a complaint filed by some aggrieved person. The question is whether the person who filed the complaint of defamation is or is not really aggrieved 17 within the meaning of that section. This is a question which should be decided on the basis of the nature of accusation and also on other relevant circumstances. A fanciful or sentimental grievance of the complainant would not suffice. It must be such a grievance as the law can appreciate and it must be what has been termed 'legal grievance'. Only such a person as has directly or indirectly suffered loss of reputation complained of can alone set the law in motion." 28. In the present case the imputation as alleged never intended to vilify the petitioner or any of the relatives. It is the universally accepted human tendency that a man can commit mistake either due to innocence or under the pressure of circumstances and in the present case admittedly there were incompatible atmosphere in the family which can compel any of the member of family to use such type of words as are mentioned in the present case. No intention to harm or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation with harm the reputation of the petitioner is proved and therefore, mere saying that feelings of the petitioner were wounded by such imputation is not enough to attract the provisions of defamation. 29. In view of the aforesaid discussions and taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of this case I am of the considered view that the plea taken by revisionist petitioner is not tenable in law. Accordingly, revision petition is hereby dismissed. No order as to costs. Copy of the order be given 18 dasti to both the parties and be also sent to trial court alnongwith trial court record. Revision petition file be consigned to the Record Room. (B.S. CHUMBAK) ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE-3 NORTH EAST DISTT.:DELHI Announced in the open court on 04.09.10 19 Crl. Rev. no. 10/10 04.09.10 Present: Revisionist petitioner in person. None for respondent. Vide separate detailed order revision petition is hereby dismissed. No order as to costs. Copy of the order be given dasti to both the parties and be also sent to trial court alnongwith trial court record. Revision petition file be consigned to the Record Room. (B.S. CHUMBAK) ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE-3 NORTH EAST DISTT.:DELHI 04.09.2010