Tathagata Satpathy And Another vs Santilata Choudhury And Others on 19 June, 2017 Author: S.K. Sahoo Bench: S.K. Sahoo IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Criminal Revision No. 391 of 2001 From the order dated 02.07.2001 passed by the J.M.F.C., Cuttack in I.C.C. No. 52 of 1995. ----------------------------- Tathagata Satpathy & Another ......... Petitioners -Versus- Santilata Choudhury & others ......... Opp. Parties For Petitioners: - Kalayan Patnaik (Senior Advocate) For Opp. Party No.1: - D.C. Rout For Opp. Parties Nos. 2 and 3: - Sanatan Jena For Opp. Party No.4: - Bhakta Kishore Bal Criminal Revision No. 375 of 1998 From the order dated 29.07.1998 passed by the S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack in I.C.C. No. 52 of 1995. ----------------------------- Sitakanta Mohapatra & Another ......... Petitioners -Versus- Santilata Choudhury ......... Opp. Party 2 For Petitioners: - Karunakar Jena For Opp. Party: - Dharanidhar Nayak (Senior Advocate) ---------------------------- P R E S E N T: THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Date of Hearing: 08.03.2017 Date of Judgment: 19.06.2017 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- S. K. Sahoo, J. The petitioners Tathagata Satapathy and Dandapani Misra in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001 have challenged the impugned order dated 02.07.2001 passed by the learned J.M.F.C., Cuttack in I.C.C. Case No.52 of 1995 in rejecting their application for recalling the order dated 29.04.1995 passed by the learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack in taking cognizance of offences under sections 500, 501 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and issuance of process against them. The petitioners Sitakanta Mohapatra and Niranjan Sahoo in Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998 have challenged the impugned order dated 29.07.1998 passed by the learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack in I.C.C. Case No.52 of 1995 in rejecting their application for recalling the very same order dated 29.04.1995 passed by the learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack. 3 Since both the revision petitions arise out of the same case in which the applications filed by the respective petitioners to recall the very same order of taking cognizance and issuance of process have been rejected, with the consent of the parties, those were heard analogously and are being disposed of by this common judgment. 2. The opposite party Santilata Choudhury (hereafter 'the complainant') filed the complaint petition in the Court of learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack on 06.04.1995 stating therein that she was an active social worker and a member of National Congress and was the Vice President of the Cuttack District Congress (I) Seva Dal and she was also the Secretary of Mahila Congress. It is further stated in the complaint petition that the petitioner no.1 Sitakanta Mohapatra (Criminal Revision No.375 1998) was defeated in the last assembly election and the petitioner no.2 Niranjan Sahoo (Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998) was a henchman of petitioner no.1 and was the President of Barchana Block Congress and both the petitioners were envious and zealous against the complainant as she was inducted in the Congress Seva Dal. Both the petitioners with their supporters called a meeting and published defamatory news items in the newspapers i.e. 'Dharitri', 'Pragativadi' and 'Matrubhasa' without any basis to cause harm to the reputation 4 of the complainant with malafide intention. It is stated that the printer and publisher of the newspapers have not published the news items in good faith and by such publication, the complainant who had a social standing, reputation and respect was defamed and the general public formed a bad impression on the complainant after reading such items. It is further stated that the witnesses named in the complaint petition handed over the newspapers to the complainant and after going through the news items, the complainant sent pleader notices to accused nos.1 and 2 (petitioners in Criminal Revision No.375 1998) who did not reply to the notices and since the complainant was mentally upset, she thought it proper to take shelter in the Court of law. The complainant filed the news items published in 'Dharitri', 'Pragativadi', 'Matrubhasa' as well as the pleader notices to accused nos. 1 and 2 along with the complaint petition. 3. The learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack recorded the initial statement of the complainant and on being prima facie satisfied, took cognizance of the offences under sections 500 , 501 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code vide order dated 29.04.1995 and issued process against all the six accused persons named in the complaint petition including the petitioners in both the revision petitions. 5 4. On perusal of the lower Court records which was called for by this Court, it is found that after cognizance of offences was taken by the learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack, on 17.12.1997 the accused no.1 and 2 (petitioners in Criminal Revision No.375 1998) filed a petition to recall the order of taking cognizance which was rejected vide order dated 29.07.1998 which is impugned in Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998. The order of taking cognizance and issuance of process against accused no.6 Pravakar Mishra who is stated to be the editor and publisher of 'Matrubhasa' was recalled by the learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack vide order dated 29.07.1998 considering his petition for recall dated 13.01.1998. 5. The trial of the complaint case started and the complainant Santilata Choudhury was examined on 01.03.1999 as P.W.1 and she supported her case and she was also cross- examined by the learned defence counsel for accused nos. 4 and 5 (petitioners in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001). The three news items published in Dharitri, Pragativadi and Matrubhasa were also marked as exhibits. The order sheet dated 18.03.1999 indicates that a petition was filed by accused no.1 Sitakanta Mohapatra (petitioner in Criminal Revision No.375 1998) to recall the 6 complainant (P.W.1) for cross-examination which was allowed on 22.04.1999. On 21.06.1999 accused nos. 4 and 5 (petitioners in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001) filed a petition to decide on the point of jurisdiction. On 17.08.1999 another petition was filed by accused no.3 Priyaranjan Das to decide on the point of jurisdiction. On 03.01.2000 both the petitions filed by accused nos. 3, 4 and 5 to decide the point of jurisdiction were rejected by the learned J.M.F.C., Cuttack. On 28.02.2001 separate petitions were filed by accused nos. 3, 4 and 5 to recall of the order of cognizance. Considering such petitions filed by the accused nos. 3, 4 and 5, the order dated 02.07.2001 was passed by the learned J.M.F.C., Cuttack which is impugned in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001. 6. In Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998 which was filed on 28.08.1998, notice was issued to the complainant on 20.10.1998 and though Misc. Case No.287 of 1999 was filed on 27.04.1999 for stay of further proceeding of the complaint petition but no stay order was passed. In Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001, notice was issued on 03.08.2001 and further proceeding of the complaint case proceeding was stayed. 7. Mr. Kalayan Patnaik, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001 7 contended that the alleged defamatory news items were published in different newspapers on different dates and those were not one and same but their contents were also different and therefore, one complaint petition against all the three newspapers for different publications is not maintainable. It is further contended that the news item published in 'Dharitri' does not constitute an offence of defamation and the learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack had no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the complaint petition as the complainant belongs to village Khaira under Barachana police station in the district of Jajpur and the witnesses who stated to have handed over the newspapers to the complainant are also of either Jajpur or Kendrapara district and therefore, since no cause of action arose within the territorial jurisdiction of the S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack, complaint petition should not have been entertained at Cuttack. The learned counsel further contended that there is no pleading in the complaint petition regarding the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned Court. Learned counsel relied upon the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Abhay Lalan -Vrs.- Yogendra Madhavalal reported 1998 Criminal Law Journal 1667, Navinchandra N. Majithia -Vrs.- State of Maharashtra reported in A.I.R. 2000 S.C. 2966 and Oil 8 Natural Gas Commission -Vrs.- Utpal Kumar Basu reported in 1994 (3) SCALE 22. Mr. Karunakar Jena, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998 contended that the petitioners are neither publishers nor editors of any of the newspapers i.e. 'Dharitri', 'Pragativadi' and 'Matrubhasa' and the contents of the alleged defamatory news items, if taken on its face value do not constitute the ingredients of the offences under which cognizance was taken and therefore, the issuance of process against the petitioners is illegal. It is further stated that such a complaint petition was filed with oblique motive due to political dispute and the judicial process should not be used as an instrument of oppression. It is contended that the chances of ultimate conviction of the petitioners for the alleged offences is bleak and therefore, no useful purpose would be served in allowing the prosecution to continue. The learned counsel relied upon the decisions rendered in the cases of State of Haryana -Vrs.- Ch. Bhajanlal reported in AIR 1992 SC 604, Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia -Vrs.- Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre reported in AIR 1988 SC 709, Biraja Panda -Vrs.- State of Orissa reported in Vol.81 (1996) Cuttack Law Times 417, Ramesh Chandra Das -Vrs.- Premalata Patra reported in (1988) 1 Orissa Criminal 9 Reports 577, Manda Marandi -Vrs.- State of Orissa reported in (2008) 39 Orissa Criminal Reports 359, M/s. Zandu Pharmaceutical -Vrs.- Md. Sharaful Haque reported in 2005 (Vol.I) Orissa Law Review (SC) 51. 8. The ratio of the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998 would indicate that where accepting the case of the complainant in its entirety, the prima facie ingredients of the offences are not attracted or the chances of ultimate conviction is bleak and continuance of the criminal proceeding would amount to abuse of process of the Court, the High Court can exercise its inherent jurisdiction under section 482 of Cr.P.C. to quash the proceeding otherwise it would be miscarriage of justice. The Court cannot be utilized for any oblique purpose. Where no prima facie case is available in support of the complaint case and the complainant is not coming to the Court with clean hand, the High Court can exercise its inherent power and quash the order of taking cognizance. So far as the ratio of the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001 are concerned, in the case of Abhaya Lalan - Vrs.- Yogendra Madhablal reported 1998 Criminal Law Journal 1667, it was held as follows: 10 "5.......The question involved is one of jurisdiction. If, as a matter of fact, the learned Magistrate has no jurisdiction to try the complaint and if the Magistrate proceeds with the complaint, it will be an abuse of the process of the Court and for the purpose of securing the ends of justice, interference can be made by the High Court in exercise of its inherent powers under section 482 of the Code." In the case of Navinchandra N. Majithia -Vrs.- State of Maharashtra reported in A.I.R. 2000 S.C. 2966, it is held that so far as the question of territorial jurisdiction with reference to a criminal offence is concerned, the main factor to be considered is the place where the alleged offence was committed. In the case of Oil Natural Gas Commission -Vrs.- Utkal Kumar Basu reported in 1994 (3) SCALE 22, it is held that in determining the objection of lack of territorial jurisdiction, the Court must take all the facts pleaded in support of the cause of action into consideration albeit without embarking upon and inquiry as to the correctness or otherwise of the said facts and the question of territorial jurisdiction must be decided on the facts pleaded in the petition. 11 9. In the case of Subramanian Swamy -Vrs.- Union of India reported in (2016) 64 Orissa Criminal Reports (SC) 561 where the constitutional validity of sections 499 and 500 of the Indian Penal Code and sections 199(1) to 199(4) of Cr.P.C. was challenged, it was held that Cr.P.C . governs the territorial jurisdiction and needless to say, if there is abuse of the said jurisdiction, the person grieved by the issue of summons can take appropriate steps in accordance with law. In matters of criminal defamation, the heavy burden is on the Magistracy to scrutinize the complaint from all aspects. He must be satisfied that ingredients of section 499 of I.P.C. are satisfied. Application of mind in the case of complaint is imperative. Law is well settled that where a newspaper containing a defamatory article is printed and published at one place and is circulated or sold at other places by or on behalf of the accused responsible for the printing and publishing the newspaper, then there would be publication of the defamatory article in all such other places and the jurisdictional Magistrate can entertain the complaint for defamation. (Ref:- 1994 Criminal Law Journal 3510, P.Lankesh -Vrs.- H. Shivappa). In the case of Martin Lottery Agencies -Vrs.- S. Maniraman reported in 2005 Criminal Law Journal 3146, it is held that crimes are local and justifiable only by the local 12 Courts within whose jurisdiction those crimes are committed and only when a criminal offence commenced within the jurisdiction of one Court and completed within the jurisdiction of another Court, it may be tried by either of the Courts but, it is to be seen by the Court that the area within which offence is committed as the same is relevant for deciding the place of trial and if the offence is committed wholly outside the jurisdiction, a Magistrate cannot try the case. Considering the facts of that case, it was further held that there is no material on record to show that the newspaper "Athirshtam" was circulated and sold at Gangtok, Sikkim and as such the Trial Court had rightly held that it has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain and try the case. Even assuming the offence was committed at Madurai, Tamil Nadu, the parties being the residents of Tamil Nadu, Madurai is the right place of trial and mere statement of a witness that he heard rumors about the publication of the defamatory articles/items in the newspaper "Athirshtam" in Tamil language and some of their friends had brought those newspapers and made the witness understand in Nepali language and, knowledge of such rumors at Gangtok will not constitute the requirements of publications or circulation or selling of those newspapers at Gangtok within the territorial jurisdiction of the Trial Court. 13 In the case of S. Bangarappa -Vrs.- Ganesh Narayan Hegde reported in 1984 Criminal Law Journal 1618, where the alleged defamatory statement made by the accused in the press conference at 'B' was published in the evening newspaper 'Sanje Vani' on the same day at 'B' and in the daily newspaper 'Samyukta Karnataka' in the early hours of the very next day at 'H', it was held that the Court at 'H' had jurisdiction to try the offence of defamation. Section 179 Cr.P.C. applies to those offences which, by their very definition, consist of an act and its consequence. In short, the act and its consequence must together constitute an offence. The offence of defamation consists not only of the statement said to have been made but also its publication. The publication is a consequence of the alleged statement said to be made by the accused. Therefore, the Court that would have jurisdiction must be the Court where the act has been done or where the consequence has ensued. The consequence contemplated by Section 179 is not a remote consequence of the act done. 'Consequence' is confined to that which is an ingredient of the offence for which the accused person is being tried. It was not the case of accused that 'Samyukta Karnataka' made a reference to the publication of the news item in 'Sanje Vani' and made it a sure for publication in its paper. The publication of the statement in 14 'Samyukta Karnataka' had nothing to do with the publication made by 'Sanje Vani'. Looking to the close Proximity of time and the place, unity of purpose or design in publishing the same, one can very well make out that the publication of the alleged statement 'Samyukta Karnataka' was a consequence of the statement made in the press conference. Therefore, it cannot be said that the publication of the statement in 'Sanje Vani' completed the alleged offence of defamation in 'B' itself. It may be that the Court at 'B' also might have had jurisdiction but the fact remains that an independent paper like 'Samyukta Karnataka' independent of the publication in 'Sanje Vani', published that statement in 'H'. Therefore, the publication of the alleged statement in 'Samyukta Karnataka' will be a consequence within the meaning of Section 179 Cr.P.C. Once the consequence of publication has taken place at 'H', it cannot be said that Court at 'H' has no jurisdiction to try the present offence. In the case of Dr. Subramaniam Swamy -Vrs.- P.S. Pai reported in 1984 Criminal Law Journal 1329, the Bombay High Court was dealing with a case of alleged defamatory statement made by the accused in press conference at Chandigarh but the statement in the newspaper was circulated 15 and read in Bombay. On the question of jurisdiction, the Bombay High Court held that the particular newspaper in which the impugned news item is published is circulated and read in the city of Bombay where the complainant resides. The Court took the view that the consequence of the statement made at Chandigarh has been completed at Bombay by circulation of the said newspapers, and, therefore, the offence of defamation is complete in the city of Bombay. As per Section 179 of the Code, both the Courts at Chandigarh and at Bombay will have jurisdiction to entertain a complaint under Section 500 of the Indian Penal Code. In the case of M.P. Narayana Pillai -Vrs.- M.P. Chacko reported in 1986 Criminal Law Journal 2002, where in the matter relating to defamatory proceedings out of the news item published and the cognizance taken by the Court was challenged, the Hon'ble High Court of Kerala held as follows:- "7. One of the contentions of the petitioners is that the Magistrate acted illegally in taking cognizance of the offence when he had no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the complaint. That contention does not appear to be correct. It is true that the Kalakaumudi Weekly is printed and published from Trivandrum but in order to 16 maintain a prosecution for defamation in a particular Court, there need only be publication of the libel within the jurisdiction of the Court where the complaint is filed. Jurisdiction has to be decided on the basis of the allegations in the complaint for the purpose of a proceeding under Section 499 . The very allegation of the 1st Respondent in the complaint is that it was published at Vaikom also and it was from there that he got and read a copy of it. Being a weekly publication intended to be read by people, it is enough for the complainant to show that the publication was delivered within the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of the Court in order to invest that Court with jurisdiction. It need not be shown that the defamatory matter was seen or read by any particular person within the jurisdiction of that Court. Since the weekly is being printed and published for the purpose of reading by the people when it is shown that it was published it could be presumed that it was read." In the case of K.M. Mathew -Vrs.- State of Kerala reported in (1992) 5 Orissa Criminal Reports 66, in a case of defamation, the Magistrate held that the complaint in so far as it relates to the Chief Editor could not be proceeded with. The Kerala High Court reversed the order of the Magistrate. The Hon'ble Supreme Court allowed the appeal and held as follows:- 17 "In the instant case there is no averment against the Chief Editor except the motive attributed to him. Even the motive alleged is general and vague. The complainant seems to rely upon the presumption under Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 ('the Act'). But Section 7 of the Act has no applicability for a person who is simply named as 'Chief Editor'. The presumption under Section 7 is only against the person whose name is printed as 'editor' as required under Section 5(1) . There is a mandatory (though rebuttable) presumption that the person whose name is printed as 'Editor' is the editor of every portion of that issue of the newspaper of which a copy is produced. Section 1(1) of the Act defines 'Editor' to mean 'the person who controls the selection of the matter that is published in a newspaper'. Section 7 raises the presumption in respect of a person who is named as the editor and printed as such on every copy of the newspaper. The Act does not recognise any other legal entity for raising the presumption. Even if the name of the Chief Editor is printed in the newspaper, there is no presumption against him under Section 7 of the Act. (See State of Maharashtra -Vrs.- Dr. R.B.Chowdhary and Ors. 1968 Criminal Law Journal 95 ; D.P.Mishra -Vrs.- Kamal Narain Sharma and Ors., (1971) 3 SCR 257; Narasingh Charan Mohanty -Vrs.- Surendra 18 Mohanty, (1974) 2 SCR 39 and Haji C.H.Mohammad Koya -Vrs.- T.K.S.M.A. Muthukoya, (1979) 1 SCR 664.) It is important to state that for a Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence as against the Chief Editor, there must be positive averments in the complaint of knowledge of the objectionable character of the matter. The complaint in the instant case does not contain any such allegation. In the absence of such allegation, the Magistrate was justified in directing that the complaint so far as it relates to the Chief Editor could not be proceeded with. To ask the Chief Editor to undergo the trial of the case merely on the ground of the issue of process would be oppressive. No person should be tried without a prima facie case. The view taken by the High Court is untenable. The appeal is accordingly allowed. The order of the High Court is set aside." In the case of Jawaharlal Darda v. Manoharrao Ganpatrao Kapsikar reported in (1998) 4 Supreme Court Cases 112, a news item was published on 04.02.84, the complaint in that behalf was filed by the complainant on 02.02.87 and the news item merely disclosed what happened during the debate which took place in the Assembly on 13.12.83. It stated that when a question regarding misappropriation of 19 Government funds meant for Majalgaon and Jaikwadi was put to the Minister concerned, he had replied that a preliminary enquiry was made by the Government and it disclosed that some misappropriation had taken place. When questioned further about the names of persons involved, he had stated the names of five persons, including that of the complainant. The said proceedings came to be published by the accused in its Daily on 04.02.84. As because the name of the complainant was mentioned as one of the persons involved and likely to be suspected, he filed a complaint before the learned C.J.M. alleging that as a result of publications of the said report, he had been defamed. It is quite apparent that what the accused had published in its newspaper was an accurate and true report of the proceedings of the Assembly. Involvement of the respondent was disclosed by the preliminary enquiry made by the Government. If the accused bona fide believing the version of the Minister to be true published the report in good faith, it cannot be said that they intended to harm the reputation of the complainant. It was a report in respect of public conduct of public servants who were entrusted with public funds intended to be used for public good. It was further held that the facts and circumstances of the case disclose that the news items were 20 published for public good, in holding not liable for criminal defamation. 10. The relevant news item which was published in the Odia daily 'Dharitri' dated 08.12.1994 under the caption "Criminals are encouraged to join Congress" indicates that more than hundred Congress leaders from thirty nine Grama Panchayats of Barchana and Dharmasala Block of Jajpur District came to PCC Office at Bhubaneswar and presented a memorandum addressing to the President indicating therein by way of protest not to accept Pramod Choudhury and Santilata Choudhury (complainant) in the Congress Party as they are inter-provincial smugglers. According to the complainant, this part of the news item published in Odia daily 'Dharitri' is defamatory. The newspaper 'Dharitri' in its last page indicates that it was printed and published by Sri Dandapani Misra (petitioner in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001) on behalf of Samajbadi Society at Navajat Printers, B-15, Industrial Estate, Bhubaneswar and edited by Tathagata Satpathy (petitioner in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001). It is further mentioned, inter alia, that the newspaper has an office at Cuttack in Pithapur and the phone number of the office has been given. 21 On perusal of the complaint petition, it is clear that nowhere it is mentioned as to where the complainant came to know about the news item though it is mentioned therein that the witnesses handed over the newspapers to the complainant and the complainant on going through these newspapers gave pleader notice to the accused. The pleader notice dated 11.12.1994 which is available on record also does not indicate as to where the complainant came to know about the news item. There is no dispute that the complainant has given her address at village-Khaira, P.S.-Barchana, District-Jajpur and the witnesses cited in the complaint petition are either of District- Jajpur or Kendrapara. There is no averment that the defamatory matter was seen or read by any particular person within the jurisdiction of the Court of learned S.D.J.M. (Sadar), Cuttack. However, since there is an office of the newspaper 'Dharitri' at Cuttack in Pithapur as mentioned in the back of the newspaper, the complainant has prima facie established that the publication was delivered within the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of the Court of learned S.D.J.M.(Sadar), Cuttack in order to invest that Court with jurisdiction. On careful analysis of the news item published in 'Dharitri', there is nothing against the two petitioners Sitakanta 22 Mohapatra and Niranjan Sahoo in Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998. The news item reflects the summary of the contents of memorandum presented by the Congress leaders of thirty nine Grama Panchayats at PCC Office, Bhubaneswar addressed to the President. It is quite apparent that what the petitioners in Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001 had published in the newspaper 'Dharitri' was the summary of the contents of memorandum and it is not their individual opinion. It seems that the report was published in the news paper 'Dharitri' in good faith without any intention to harm the reputation of the complainant. Similarly, in the news item published in 'Pragativadi' dated 07.12.1994 under the caption 'Charles Sobhraj of Orissa in Congress Party', though similar news item regarding presentation of memorandum against the complainant to the PCC President has been mentioned along with the summary of the memorandum but there is nothing against the two petitioners Sitakanta Mohapatra and Niranjan Sahoo in Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998. In the news items published either in Odia daily 'Dharitri' or in 'Pragativadi', there are no materials that such publications were at the instance of the petitioners Sitakanta 23 Mohapatra and Niranjan Sahoo in Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998. Even the names of these two petitioners do not find place in the news items. Though in the news item published in 'Matrubhasa', some statements of petitioners Sitakanta Mohapatra and Niranjan Sahoo have been published but since the order taking cognizance against accused no.6 Pravakar Mishra who is stated to be the editor and publisher of 'Matrubhasa' was recalled vide order dated 29.07.1998, such news item cannot be utilized against petitioners Sitakanta Mohapatra and Niranjan Sahoo. 11. In view of the above analysis, though the power of this Court to quash the criminal proceedings pending before the subordinate Courts must be exercised sparingly and with circumspection but when on the available materials on record, the ingredients of offences under sections 500, 501 read with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code are not attracted against any of the petitioners in the two criminal revision petitions i.e. Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001 and Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998 and chances of ultimate conviction of any of the petitioners is bleak and continuance of the criminal proceeding would amount to abuse of process of the Court, in the fitness of things and in exercise of my inherent jurisdiction under section 24 482 of Cr.P.C., in order to prevent miscarriage of justice, I am inclined to accept the prayer made by the petitioners and quash the criminal proceedings against them in I.C.C. Case No.52 of 1995 pending in the Court of learned J.M.F.C., Cuttack. Before parting, I would humbly say that the constitutional freedom of speech and expression is subjected to reasonable restraints but it cannot be suppressed on the ground of convenience. Any attempt to destroy the fourth pillar of Indian democracy by any atheistic demon Hiranyakashipu and to control the fair and honest media reporting for ulterior motive can have a devastating effect and would give rise to Lord Narasimha Avatar. Therefore, practice of tolerance is a welcome sign in constitutional scheme. Accordingly, Criminal Revision No.391 of 2001 and Criminal Revision No.375 of 1998 are allowed. .............................. S.K. Sahoo, J. Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 19th June, 2017/Sukanta