Ranveer Singh vs State Of U.P. And 7 Others on 16 December, 2016 Bench: V.K. Shukla , Mahesh Chandra Tripathi HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD AFR Court No. - 21 Case :- WRIT - C No. - 51986 of 2016 Petitioner :- Ranveer Singh Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 7 Others Counsel for Petitioner :- Manish Goyal Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C. Hon'ble V.K. Shukla,J. Hon'ble Mahesh Chandra Tripathi,J. (Oral : V.K. Shukla, J.) Present Writ Petition in question is directed against the order passed by District Magistrate, Saharanpur dated 06.10.2016 in exercise of authority conferred under Section 21(1) and Section 21(5) of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as the ' MMDR Act ') annexed as Annexure no.1 to the Writ Petition wherein recovery initiated against the petitioner has been held to be justifiable and apart from the same, the petitioner has also further challenged the validity of the notice dated 31.08.2012, notice dated 09.12.2014, notice dated 09.07.2015 and notice dated 08.09.2015 issued by respondent nos.6 and 7 respectively. Petitioner Ranveer Singh claims that he is resident of village Aslampur Bartha, Tehsil Behat, District Saharanpur and is a social worker and currently he is holding the office of Pradhan of Village Aslampur Bartha Rasulpur @ Rasuli and of Bartha Kursi. Petitioner has proceeded to make a mention that he has been heading movement against illegal mining and it was due to his effort that illegal mining has been exposed in the district of Saharanpur wherein Mohd. Iqbal s/o Abdul Wahid is a principal player. Petitioner, it appears had made a point that action be taken against Mohd. Iqbal for financial irregularities and it appears that armed with requisite material petitioner approached the Apex Court by filing petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India, which came to be registered as Writ Petition No.818/2015 before the Hon'ble Apex Court with following reliefs:- "(a) Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the investigation by Special Investigation Team or any other central investigative agency into the financial affairs of Mr. Mohd. Iqbal s/o Abdul Waheed, R/o vill. Mirzapur Pol, Tehsil Behat, District Saharanpur, Uttar Pradesh. (b) Direct the respondents to attach the benami properties details of which is annexed as Annexure-P/9 and the same is purchased by Mohd. Iqbal through his various companies/partnership firms/relatives/employees etc.; and (c) pass such further order of orders, as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the circumstances of this case." In the said proceedings in question, the Hon'ble Apex Court proceeded to pass following order on 14.12.2015: "Issue notice. Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General accepts notice on behalf of respondent No.1, 3 to 7 and 10 to 14. Liberty is given to serve Mr. Gaurav Bhatia, learned Additional Advocate General for the State of U.P. in respect of respondent No.2. Notice to respondent No.8 and 9, namely, Chief Secretary, State of Haryana and Chief Secretary, State of Uttarakhand is for the present dispensed with. Mr. Anupam Mishra, learned counsel accepts notice on behalf of respondent No.15. Learned counsel for the respondents to file counter affidavit within four weeks. Rejoinder affidavit, if any, be filed within two weeks thereafter.The petitioner shall also file additional affidavit stating the following:- (1) The number of writ petitions earlier filed by the petitioner against respondent No.15. Copies of the said writ petitions and orders passed by the High Court on the same, shall also be filed. (2) The number of criminal cases registered against the petitioner and the details thereof as also their present status. (3) The number of cases of illegal mining registered against the petitioner or orders passed by the competent authorities imposing penalties for such illegal mining. Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General shall also take instructions from the respondents for whom he appears as to the modalities which the respondents propose to adopt in regard to verification and if necessary investigation into the allegations made in the writ petitions and for initiating proceedings wherever the same are necessary. We make it clear that if the authority competent to inquire into the matter finds it to be a fit case to initiate any inquiry or investigation they shall be free to do so. The present proceedings shall not be seen as an impediment for them to initiate legal action wherever such action is deemed necessary. List in the month of February, 2016." The matter has been taken up once again before Hon'ble the Apex Court on 25.04.2016 whereon following order has been passed: "UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R D E R Mr. Maninder Singh, learned ASG has today filed a status report each on behalf of CBDT, Enforcement Directorate and SFIO. From a reading of the said reports, it appears that the authorities have taken cognizance of the allegations made by the writ-petitioner and initiated appropriate investigation into the same. Mr. Maninder Singh submits that given three months' further time, the three agencies mentioned above would submit a further report as to the progress made in connection with the on-going investigation. Time prayed for is granted. The agencies to file a status report in regard to the progress made within three months from today. Mr. P.Chidambaram, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 15 points out that apart from certain criminal cases, there are certain outstanding demands for an amount of Rs. 4,26,62,680/- approximately against him. Mr. H.P.Raval, learned senior counsel for the petitioner submits that apart from a demand of Rs. 12,05,300/- mentioned at Serial 4, he has not received any other demand letter mentioned in the said affidavit. Learned counsel for the State of U.P. and the District Magistrate concerned undertakes to serve copies of the three demands letter referred to above upon Mr. D.Mahesh Babu, learned counsel for the petitioner. Service of the said demand letters on the learned counsel shall be taken as service upon the writ- petitioner who shall then have three weeks' time to reply to the said demand letter before the District Judge/competent authority concerned. We hope and trust that the competent authority would take up the matter as regards the recovery of the amount due from the petitioner and take the proceedings to their logical conclusion. Copies of the demand letters shall also be furnished to Mr. Maninder Singh who shall forward the same to the concerned authorities for any investigation at their end, if so advised. List on 08.08.2016. Civil Appeal Nos. 2667 of 2016 Civil Appeal D 9109 of 2016, 7484 of 2016, 7821 of 2016: De-linked. To be listed before an appropriate Bench of which Hon'ble Mr. Justice Uday Umesh Lalit is not a member after obtaining orders from Hon'ble the Chief Justice of India. Interim Orders dated 14.03.2016 and 18.03.2016 shall continue until further orders from this Court." The matter, thereafter, has been taken up on 08.08.2016 whereon following order has been passed: "UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following O R D E R Mr. P.N.Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing for the District Magistrate who happens to be the competent authority in relation to the demand notices issued to the petitioner submits that according to his instructions, the petitioner has not so far responded to the notices served upon him pursuant to our Order dated 25.04.2016. Mr. H.P.Raval, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner however disputes this position and submits that the petitioner has already responded to the notices and that the proceedings before the competent authority are in progress. In the circumstances, all that we need direct at this stage is that the competent authority shall expedite the finalisation of the proceedings and pass appropriate orders expeditiously but not later than two months from today. Copies of the final orders passed by the competent authority shall be placed before the Court by the date of hearing. Mr. Maninder Singh learned ASG has drawn our attention to the second status report filed on behalf of respondents No. 4 and 12 to point out that the investigation into the allegations and the complaints made by the petitioner has been taken up in the right earnest and several steps accomplished. He points out that keeping in view the magnitude of the work involved, the investigation agency may require three months' further time to report further developments and progress in connection with the same. We see no reason to decline that prayer. We direct that the investigation initiated by respondents No. 4 and 12 referred to in the affidavit filed on their behalf shall be carried out and a status report based on the progress made be filed on or before the next date of hearing. Mr. Raval, at this stage submits that although the petitioner had filed several complaints to the Director, CBI for investigation into several allegations made against respondent No. 15 and persons connected with him, the CBI has not taken any action in the matter. He submits that now that the reports submitted by respondents No. 4 and 12 suggest that several companies some of which prima facie fake and shell companies are indulging in extensive business possibly of money laundering have been noticed in the course of investigations, the CBI could look into the complaints more seriously and take whatever action was legally permissible and warranted. Mr. Maninder Singh submits that CBI will have no difficulty in looking into the complaints filed by the petitioner in the light of the reports submitted by the Enforcement Directorate and the CBDT. In that view, we expect the CBI to examine the matter at an appropriate level for such action as may be considered necessary in accordance with law. A status report on the action taken by all agencies shall be filed before the next date of hearing. Post after three months. We make it clear that we have expressed no opinion on the merits of any contentions open to the parties both on facts and in law. The status reports filed by Mr. R Balasubramanian on behalf of Enforcement Directorate and CBDT are taken on record." From the order dated 08.08.2016 passed by Hon'ble the Apex Court, this much is clear that Hon'ble the Apex Court has taken note of the fact that petitioner has already responded to the notices and the proceedings before the Competent Authority are in progress. Hon'ble the Apex Court has proceeded to make a mention that in such a situation all that is needed is that the competent authority shall expedite the finalisation of the proceedings and pass appropriate orders expeditiously but not later than two months from today and copies of the final orders passed by the competent authority shall be placed before the Court by the date of hearing. This is an accepted position that the proceedings in question has been finalized by means of order dated 06.10.2016 passed by District Magistrate, Saharanpur for recovering a sum of Rs.4,26,62,680/- from the petitioner and the said order in question is now being assailed before us. On 05.11.2016, we have proceeded to pass order for making a request before Hon'ble Apex Court to pursue the matter before this Court or alternatively the matter be pursued before the Apex Court. Relevant extract of the said order reads as follows: "We have been informed that the next date fixed before Hon'ble the Apex Court is 15.11.2016 and in our considered opinion, once the next date fixed in the matter is 15.11.2016 and the matter is engaging the attention of Hon'ble the Apex Court and copies of the final order passed by the Competent Authority has been directed to be placed before the Court concerned, in view of this, it would be much more appropriate if liberty is sought from the Apex Court to pursue the matter before this Court or alternatively the matter be agitated before Hon'ble the Apex Court itself by calling for the record of writ petition itself." On 02.12.2016 when the matter was taken up, a supplementary affidavit in question has been filed indicating therein that before the Apex Court, IA No. 7 of 2016 had been filed with following request: "a) Restrain the State of Uttar Pradesh from taking any steps for recovery of amounts from the Petitioner pursuant to order of DM, Saharanpur dt. 06.10.2016. b) Stay the order dt. 06.02.2016 passed by DM, Saharanpur in Misc. Application No. 661/2016 and consequential proceedings. c) Direct the District Magistrate, Saharanpur to produce original files relating to issuance and service of demand notices dt. 31.08.2012, 09.12.2014, 09.07.2015 and 08.09.2015; and d) pass such other and further order as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper. AND FOR THIS ACT OF KINDNESS THE PETITIONER AS IN DUTY BOUND SHALL EVER PRAY." In I.A. No.7 of 2016 following order has been passed: "Upon hearing the counsel the Court made the following order O R D E R Learned counsel for the petitioner seeks leave withdraw I.A. No. 7 of 2016 (Application for direction). I.A. No. 7 of 2016 is dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to seek appropriate redress in appropriate proceedings." Further as I.A. No. 7 of 2016 has been permitted to be dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to seek appropriate redress in appropriate proceedings and the present writ petition in question has already been filed before this Court assailing the decision making process itself, as such after hearing the parties, we proceeded to pass an order asking the learned Standing Counsel to produce relevant records on the basis of which assessment in question has been done and such a conclusion has been drawn and further that the matter will be taken up on 15th December, 2016 in computer list. Today the entire records leading to the impugned order in question has been produced before us and thereafter with the consent of parties, present matter in question is being heard and finally decided. Shri Manish Goyal, counsel for the petitioner submitted that in the present case decision making process is per-se bad, inasmuch as, point of view as has been indicated by the petitioner in his reply filed has not at all been taken note of and in most arbitrary and whimsical fashion, financial liability has been shouldered upon the petitioner. Further submission has also been made that financial liability has been shouldered on mere ipse dixit, inasmuch as, at no point of time any proper inquiry has been conducted in the matter i.e. by providing the entire material that has forced the Authority to form opinion that petitioner has indulged in the activity of illegal mining and consequently liable for imposition of such heavy liability upon the petitioner. It has been contended that at no point of time, the incumbents, who have proceeded to file affidavits and deposed against the petitioners, qua them any opportunity has been provided to cross-examine them and to lead has defence, in view of this, it is being contended that once fair procedure has not been adhered to, the action taken cannot be approved of and accordingly requisite relief be accorded. Shri Atul Kumar Singh, learned Standing Counsel, on the other hand, has contended that in the present case, illegal mining has been there and material has been available on record connecting the petitioner with the activity of illegal mining and in view of this, rightful exercise has been undertaken and rightful liability has been imposed and accordingly, no interference be made. Arguments to the similar effect has been advanced by the counsel representing opposite party no.4. After respective arguments have been advanced, we proceed to examine the relevant provisions of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the Rule framed thereunder. The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 is an Act to provide for regulation of mines and development of minerals under the control of Union. Section 2 declares the expediency of Union to control the regulation of mines and development of minerals Section 3(a) defines minerals which includes all minerals except mineral oils. Section 3(e) defines minor minerals. Section 4 refers to the prospecting or mining operations to be undertaken only under a licence or lease. Section 4 is for termination of prospecting licences or mining leases, sub-section (1) is for premature termination other than minor minerals while sub-section (2) is for minor minerals. Section 5 imposes restrictions on the grant of such licences or leases. Section 6 specifies the maximum area for which a licence and lease may be granted, while Section 7 gives period for the grant and renewal of such prospective licences. Section 8 deals with the periods for mining leases. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 9 refer to the payment of royalty at the rate specified in the Second Schedule whether granted before coming into force of this Act or subsequently. Sub-section (3), empowers the Central Government to amend the Second Schedule so as to enhance or reduce the rate of royalty payable. Section 9A obliges lessee to pay the dead rent. Section 10 to 12 deal with the procedure for obtaining prospective licence, or mining leases in respect of the land in which minerals vest in the Government. Section 13 empowers the Central Government to make rules in respect of minerals. Section 14 specifically excludes Section 5 to 13 from application of quarrying leases, mining leases or other minerals concessions in respect of minor minerals. Section 15 empowers the State to make rules in respect of minor minerals. Section 16 entrusts power to modify mining leases granted before 25th October, 1949. Section 17 gives special power to the Central Government to undertake prospecting or mining operations in certain lands. Section 18 refers to the mineral development. Licences and mining leases under the Act to be void under Section 19 if made in contravention of the Act, while Section 20 makes the Act and Rules to apply to all renewals. Section 21 imposes penalties. Section 22 refers to the cognizance of offences. Section 23-C empowers the State to make rules for preventing illegal mining, transportation and storage of minerals. Section 26 entrusts both Central and the State to delegate its power under the Act on officer or authority of the Central or State. Sub-section (1) of Section 28 puts an obligation on the Central Government to place its rules and notifications before the Parliament which is subject to its modifications, if any. Similarly, the State is obliged to place its Rules and notifications before each houses of State Legislature under sub-Section (3). Section 29 makes existing rules to continue so long they are not in consistent with the Act and Rules. Section 30 empowers the Central Government to revise any order made by the State or any other authority. The First Schedule refers to the specified minerals, viz., Hydro carbons/energy minerals Atomic minerals and Metallic and non-metallic minerals with reference to , Section 4(3) 5(1) , 7(2) and 8(2) while the Second Schedule refer to the rate of royalty in all States and Union Territories except the States of Assam and West Bengal while the Third Schedule refers to the rate of Dead Rent. Thus, the aforesaid Act expressly lays down the rates of royalty of the minerals through Schedule II read with Section 9 . It is significant that Section 14 excludes Section 5 to 13 specifically for minor minerals which includes Section 9 . Section 15 , entrusts power on the State to lay down Rules in respect of the minor minerals. In the State of U.P., the State Government in exercise of its authority conferred under Section 15 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 has framed Rules knows as U.P. Minor Mineral (Concession) Rules, 1963. Relevant Rules are being dealt with and also quoted below: "Rule 2 defines "Mine Operations" as any operations undertaken for the purposes of winning any minor mineral. "Minor Mineral" means building stones, gravel, ordinary clay, ordinary sand other than sand used for prescribed purpose and any other mineral which the Central Government has declared from time to time or may declare in the Official Gazettee, to be minor mineral under Clause (e) of MMDR Act, 1957 . "State" and "State Government" means the State of Uttar Pradesh. Rule 3 clearly proceeds to mandate that but for mining lease and but for mining permit, no person shall undertake any mining operations in any area within the State of any minor mineral. Chapter II deals with grant of Mining Lease. Chapter III deals with payment of Royalty and Deadrent. 21. Royalty (1) The holder of a mining lease granted on or after the commencement of these rules shall pay' royalty in respect of any mineral removed by him from the lease area at the rates for the time being specified in the First Schedule to these Rules, 1(1-a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in rule 3 royalty should be payable by concerned brick kiln owner or user of ordinary clay on ordinary earth at the rate specified in First Schedule to these rules. (2) The State Government may, by notification in the Gazette, amend the First Schedule so as to include therein or exclude there from or enhance or reduce the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification. Provided that the State Government shall not enhance the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral for more than once during any period of three years and shall not fix the royalty at the rate of more than 20 percent of the pit's mouth value, (3) Where the royalty is to be charged on the pit's mouth value of the mineral the State Government may assess such value at the time of the grant of the lease and the rate of royalty will be mentioned in the lease deed. It shall be open to the State Government to reassess not more than once in a year the pit's mouth value if it considers that an enhancement in necessary. 22. Dead Rent The holder of a mining lease shall, during the terms of the lease, pay advance, in instalments for every year of the lease, such amount as dead rent at the rates mentioned in the second schedule to these rules, as may be specified in the lease deed by the State Government, and if the terms of lease permit the working of more\than one mineral in the same area, the said dead rent shall be paid separately for each such minerals. Provided that the lessee shall in respect of each mineral, pay the dead rent or the royalty, whichever is higher in amount and not the both. (3) On the declaration of the area or areas under sub-rule (1) the provisions of chapters II, III and VI of these rules shall not apply to the area or areas in respect of which the declaration has been issued. Such area or areas may be leased out according to the procedure described in this Chapter. (4) The District Officer shall get the area or areas declared under sub-rule (1), evaluated for quality and quantity of mineral for fixing minimum bid or offer by the Director, Geology and Mining, Uttar Pradesh or by an officer authorised by him before the date fixed for auction or tender or auction-cum-tender, as the case may be. Chapter VI deals with conditions of Mining Lease. Chapter VI deals with grant of Mining Permit. Chapter VII deals with contraventions, offences and penalties. 57. Penalty for unauthorised mining: Whoever contravenes the provisions of rule 3 shall on conviction be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term, which may extend up to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 58. Consequences of non-payment of royalty rent or other dues: (1) The State Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf may determine the mining lease after serving a notice on the lessee to pay within thirty days of the receipt of the notice any amount due or dead rent under the lease including the royalty due to the State Government if it was not paid within fifteen days next after the date fixed for such payment. This right shall be in addition to and without prejudice to the right of the State Government to realise such dues from the lessee as arrears of land revenue. (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of these rules, simple interest at the rate of 24 percent per annum may be charged on any rent, royalty, demarcation fee and any other dues under these rules, due to the State Government after the expiry of the period of notice under sub-rule (1). 59. Consequences of contravention of certain conditions: Any lessee holding a mining lease who commits a breach of any of the conditions provided in rules 44 and 47 (relating to inspection of workings and weighing machines) shall on conviction be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend up to six months or with fine which extend to one thousand rupees, or with both. 60. Premature Application:- Applications for grant of a [reconnaissance permit, prospecting licence and mining lease] in respect of areas whose availability for grant is required to be notified under rule 59 shall, if- (a) no notification has been issued, under that rule; or (b) where any such notification has been issued, the period specified in the notification has not expired, shall be deemed to be premature and shall not be entertained.] Chapter VIII Deals with Miscellaneous provisions. 66. Power of assessment entry and inspection (1) F or the purpose of assessment of royalty and for ascertaining the position of the working, actual or prospective, of any mine or abandoned mine or for any purposes connected with these rules, the District Officer or the officer of the Directorate of Geology and Mining, Uttar Pradesh, not below the rank of Mines inspectors appointed for such purposes by the Director or any other Off.1cer authorised in his behalf by the State Government by general or special order may- (a) enter and inspect any mine (b) survey and take measurement in any such mine. (c) weigh, measure or take measurement of the stock of mineral laying at any mine. (d) examine any document, book, register or record in the possession or power of any person having the control of, or connected with any mine and place marks or identifications thereon and take extracts from or make copies of such documents, book, register or records: (e) summon or order the production of any such document, book, register or record as is referred to in clause (d) (f) summon or examine any person having the control of, or connected with anymine; and (g) call for such information or return as may be considered necessary (2) Every person authorised by the State Government under sub-rule (1) shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code and every person to whom an order or summons is issued by virtue of power conferred by clause (e) or clause (f) of the said sub-rule shall be legally bound to comply with such order or summons, as case may be. 70. Restrictions on transport of the minerals: (1) The holder of a mining lease or permit or a person authorised by him in this behalf may issue a pass in Form MM-11 to every person carrying, a consignment of minor mineral by a vehicle, animal or any other mode of transport. The State Government may, through the District Officer, make arrangements for the supply of printed MM-11 Form books on payment basis. (2) No person shall carry, within the State a minor mineral by a vehicle, animal or any other mode of transport excepting railway, without carrying a pass in Form MM-II issued under sub-rule (I). (3) Every person carrying any minor mineral shall, on demand by any officer authorised under rule 66 or such officer as may be authorised by the State Government in this behalf, show the said pass to such officer and allow him to verify the correctness of the particulars of the pass with reference to the quantity of the minor mineral. (4) The State Government may establish a check post for any area included in any mining lease or permit, and when a check post is so established public notice shall be given of this fact by publication in the Gazette and in such other manner as may be considered suitable by the State Government. (5) No person shall transport a minor mineral for which these rules apply from such area without first presenting the mineral at the check post established for that area for verification of the weight or measurement of the mineral. (6) Any person found to have contravened any provision of this rule shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term, which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both." Apart from the same, Rules have also been framed for curbing illegal mining known as "Uttar Pradesh Mineral (Prevention of Illegal Mining Transportation & Storage) Rules, 2002". The said Rules in question have been framed in exercise of authority conferred under Section 23(C) of Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 and the said Rules in question are very very strict and specific as Rule 3 clearly provides to make a mention that no person shall transport, carry or cause to be transported, carried any mineral by any means from its raising place to any other place without a valid transit pass issued by the holder of mining lease or mining permit or prospecting licence as the case may be. Rules 4 and 5 deals with provision for supply of transit passes and fee, issue of transit passes. Chapter II of the aforementioned Rules deals with transportation of minerals wherein Rules 6 deals with establishment of check-posts for inspection of minerals. Rules 7 deals with transportation of minerals. Rules 6 and 7 of the said Rules are being extracted below: "6. Establishment of check-posts for inspection of minerals: (1) If the State Government considers it necessary to establish check post, with a view to check the illegal transportation of the minerals raised, it may notify the setting up of a check post at any place or places within the State. (2) The establishment of check post at any place shall be notified in the Gazette. (3) The Officer-in-Charge of the check-post or any Officer authorised by the State Government having sufficient reasons to believe that the carrying mineral (s) is not in accordance with the transit pass, then such office shall take action in accordance with sub-rule (4). (4) (a) The Officer-in-charge of the check-post or officer authorised by the State Government shall have the powre to seize the mineral alongwith the carrier. (b) The Officer-in-Charge of the check-post or any Officer authorised by the State Government shall give a receipt of such mineral and carrier seized by him to the person from whose possession or control, it is seized. (c) The Officer-in-Charge of the check-post or Officer authorised by the State Government may direct the person in-charge of the carrier to carry the mineral to the nearest check-post setup under sub-rule(1) and (2) or nearest police station. 7. Transportation of minerals: (1) All dispatch of minerals by a holder of mining lease, mining permit or prospecting licence by a carrier shall be accompanied with a transit pass, in duplicate. The person in-charge of the carrier shall produce the transit pass at the check post for the purpose, or on demand by any Officer, authorised by the State Government by notification in the official Gazette. (2) All carriers, carrying the mineral shall stop at the check post and proceed after having been cleared by the respective check-post. The In-charge of the check-post shall make necessary endorsement on the first copy of the transit pass and return immediately to the Operator of such carrier and second copy of such transit pass will be kept in records of the check-post." Chapter III deals with storage of minerals and therein Rule 11 deals with restriction on storage and transportation of minerals. All these provisions quoted above would go to show that there is a full-fledged machinery that has been kept in place to see and check that there is no illegal mining but in spite of entire machinery being there, allegations are coming forward of illegal mining being there in the State of U.P. and Saharanpur in particular. In reference of District Saharanpur, there has been large scale complaint of illegal mining and what we find that Apex Court in the case of Deepak Kumar and others vs. State of Harana and others 2014 (16) SCC 698 has proceeded to take note of the fact that there has been large scale illegal mining and ultimately noticing this fact as mentioned in report that there is no effective system in place for checking illegal mining, restrain order was put in. The relevant paras of the said judgement reads as follows: "First, we will deal with the details furnished in the report pertaining to District Saharanpur, U.P. CEC referred to five mining leases for sand, bajri and boulders presently operating in the District Saharanpur. Report says that in Lot Nos. 7, 16, 22 and 23, the area given for mining leases is less than 5 hectares and hence permission was granted by the State of U.P. for mining operations without obtaining any environmental clearance. With regard to Lot Nos.7, 8, 13, 26, 27, 28 & 29 relating to mining lease of an area of 686.693 acres, it was stated that the lease was, though originally sanctioned for a period of three years w.e.f. 6.1.2003, later it was cancelled and the lease operated only up to 9.2.2004. 5. However, by virtue of the order passed by the Allahabad High Court in CMWP No. 29797/2009, the lease was allowed to operate for the balance period of one year, ten months and twenty seven days w.e.f. 27.2.2010 and up to 24.1.2012 but without environment clearance on the ground that the lease was originally granted prior to 14.9.2006 the date of the notification of MOEF. 6. Prima facie, we are of the view that the stand taken by the State of U.P. is in clear violation of the provisions of EIA Notification dated 14.9.2006 and the notification is seen mis-interpreted and misapplied, especially when the report says that there has been an increase in annual production, compared to earlier years. 7. Report says that in addition to the above mentioned mining leases, there are about 30 sanctioned mining leases for the collection of sand, bajri and boulders from river Yamuna bed/canal beds in District of Saharanpur. But they are found to be operational without obtaining environment clearance. Report also says that the Environmental Appraisal Committee (EAC) had recommended grant of environment clearance in favour of the above 30 mining leases but the environment clearance was granted by the MoEF only in respect of two of such leases, Lot No. 25 in Village Abdullapur and Lot No. 9 in village Thapal Ismailpur, on specific condition that the prior clearance from the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wildlife (NBWL) be obtained, since the area fell within the sanctuary. No such permission has been obtained so far. The stand of the State of U.P. before the CEC was that the above 30 mining leases stood closed w.e.f. 30.6.2011. 8. CEC, however, noticed, in reality, they are functioning and large scale illegal mining is going on in the River Yamuna bed and in nearby areas. Further, it was also pointed out that large numbers of screening plants and stone crushers are seen fully operational on both sides of the River bed of Yamuna. Ramps/Roads are seen constructed for to and fro movement of the vehicles from/to such screening plants/crushers. 9. CEC has also produced the Quarterly Returns, transit passes issued by the officers and the quantity of mines and minerals transported. Report says that a total of 60,176 transit permits have been issued by the Saharanpur Mining Department for transportation of 2,40,704 cubic meter of illegally mined materials. Some of transit passes made available by CEC shows that seal of the Mining Department is affixed but there is official no signature, no details of vehicle numbers etc. Prima facie, it is seen that the Government machinery has failed in the District of Saharanpur in controlling the mining mafia. Such large-scale illegal mining operations could not have happened without the knowledge and blessings of the concerned officials. 10. Report has highlighted the sorry state of affairs as follows: "The entire illegal mining has been legalized and facilitated by the concerned officers of the State of U.P., mainly by providing a disproportionately large number of transit permits to sanctioned leaseholders and which have been misused and by allowing the illegally established screening plants and crushers to continue operating. There is no effective system in place for checking illegal mining. The CEC is also of the view that the illegal mining has continued not because of lack of effective Rules and procedure but in spite of them. This has been mainly possible because of the active connivance of the officers." 11. Learned counsel, Mr. Kamalendra Mishra, who appeared for the State of U.P., submitted that the State has taken strong measures to close down Lot Nos. 7, 8, 13, 26, 27, 28 and 29, covering an area of 686.6 acres and adequate number of police forces are deployed to ensure that illegal mining do not take place in those areas and now mining in those areas is virtually stopped with effect from 22.12.2011. 12. We fail to see, what the officers were doing all these years and they woke up only when CEC came for inspection. Prima facie, we are of the view that such large scale mining operations would not have taken place without the tacit permission and knowledge of some of the officials in-charge, which calls for detailed enquiry. 13. In view of the above mentioned circumstances, we are inclined to pass the following order: (1) The District Collector, District Superintendent of Police, and the Additional Director (Mining Division) of Sharanpur, would see that no illegal mining be carried on in the District. (2) They are directed to take immediate steps to close down all illegally operating screening plants/crushers etc. on both sides of the River Yamuna forthwith and the illegally mined sand, bajri and boulders and the vehicles be seized forthwith; (3) Screening plants/crushers located on either side of the River Yamuna, within the prohibited zone and operating in violation of guidelines issued by the U.P. Pollution Control Board and/or within the prohibited zone, shall be immediately dismantled; (4) State of U.P. would make available the details of the current mining leases granted District wise, the duration, area, with or without clearance from the State Pollution Control Board, MoEF and National Board for Wildlife. (5) Compliance report to that effect be filed before this Court within two weeks. The Chief Secretary of the State of U.P. shall ensure compliance of this order. Once illegal mining has been on the radar of the Apex Court and this much is also clear that Apex Court has taken judicial notice of the fact that over the years rivers in India have been affected by the alarming rate of unrestricted sand mining which is damaging the ecosystem of the rivers and safety of bridges. Apex Court has also mentioned that it also weakens river beds, fish breeding and destroys the natural habitat of many organisms and if these illegal activities are not stopped by the State and the police authorities of the State, it will cause serious repercussions and the same will not only change the river hydrology but also will deplete the ground water levels. Apex Court in the case of State (NCT of Delhi) vs. Sanjay 2014 (9) SCC 772 apart from the fact noted above has proceeded to make a mention that where the sand and sand and gravel from the river beds are removed without consent, which is the property of the State, the same is a distinct offence under the IPC , hence police is also competent to deal with the situation when sands, gravels and other minerals are removed/transported in clandestine manner with dishonest intent from the possession of the State. Relevant extract of the judgement reads as follows: "In the case of State of U.P. vs. Babu Ram Upadhya , AIR 1961 SC 751, while interpreting a particular statute as mandatory or directory this Court observed :- "When a statute uses the word ''shall', ''prima facie', it is mandatory, but the court may ascertain the real intention of the legislature by carefully attending to the whole scope of the statute. For ascertaining the real intention of the legislature the court may consider, inter alia, the nature and the design of the statute, and the consequences which would follow from construing it the one way or the other, the impact of other provisions whereby the necessity of complying with the provisions in question is avoided, the circumstance, namely, that the statute provides for a contingency of the non-compliance with the provisions, the fact that the non-compliance with the provisions is or is not visited by some penalty, the serious or trivial consequences that flow therefrom, and, above all, whether the object of the legislation will be defeated or furthered." 66. Considering the principles of interpretation and the wordings used in Section 22 , in our considered opinion, the provision is not a complete and absolute bar for taking action by the police for illegal and dishonestly committing theft of minerals including sand from the river bed. 67. The Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that over the years rivers in India have been affected by the alarming rate of unrestricted sand mining which is damaging the eco-system of the rivers and safety of bridges. It also weakens river beds, fish breeding and destroys the natural habitat of many organisms. If these illegal activities are not stopped by the State and the police authorities of the State, it will cause serious repercussions as mentioned hereinabove. It will not only change the river hydrology but also will deplete the ground water levels. 68. There cannot be any dispute with regard to restrictions imposed under the MMDR Act and remedy provided therein. In any case, where there is a mining activity by any person in contravention of the provisions of Section 4 and other sections of the Act, the officer empowered and authorized under the Act shall exercise all the powers including making a complaint before the jurisdictional magistrate. It is also not in dispute that the Magistrate shall in such cases take cognizance on the basis of the complaint filed before it by a duly authorized officer. In case of breach and violation of Section 4 and other provisions of the Act, the police officer cannot insist Magistrate for taking cognizance under the Act on the basis of the record submitted by the police alleging contravention of the said Act. In other words, the prohibition contained in Section 22 of the Act against prosecution of a person except on a complaint made by the officer is attracted only when such person sought to be prosecuted for contravention of Section 4 of the Act and not for any act or omission which constitute an offence under Indian Penal Code . 69. However, there may be situation where a person without any lease or licence or any authority enters into river and extracts sands, gravels and other minerals and remove or transport those minerals in a clandestine manner with an intent to remove dishonestly those minerals from the possession of the State, is laible to be punished for committing such offence under Sections 378 and 379 of the Indian Penal Code. 70. From a close reading of the provisions of MMDR Act and the offence defined under Section 378 , IPC, it is manifest that the ingredients constituting the offence are different. The contravention of terms and conditions of mining lease or doing mining activity in violation of Section 4 of the Act is an offence punishable under Section 21 of the MMDR Act, whereas dishonestly removing sand, gravels and other minerals from the river, which is the property of the State, out of State's possession without the consent, constitute an offence of theft. 71. Hence, merely because initiation of proceeding for commission of an offence under the MMDR Act on the basis of complaint cannot and shall not debar the police from taking action against persons for committing theft of sand and minerals in the manner mentioned above by exercising power under the Code of Criminal Procedure and submit a report before the Magistrate for taking cognizance against such person. In other words, in a case where there is a theft of sand and gravels from the Government land, the police can register a case, investigate the same and submit a final report under Section 173 , Cr.P.C. before a Magistrate having jurisdiction for the purpose of taking cognizance as provided in Section 190 (1)(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 72. After giving our thoughtful consideration in the matter, in the light of relevant provisions of the Act vis-à-vis the Code of Criminal Procedure and the Indian Penal Code , we are of the definite opinion that the ingredients constituting the offence under the MMDR Act and the ingredients of dishonestly removing sand and gravel from the river beds without consent, which is the property of the State, is a distinct offence under the IPC . Hence, for the commission of offence under Section 378 Cr.P.C., on receipt of the police report, the Magistrate having jurisdiction can take cognizance of the said offence without awaiting the receipt of complaint that may be filed by the authorized officer for taking cognizance in respect of violation of various provisions of the MMRD Act . Consequently the contrary view taken by the different High Courts cannot be sustained in law and, therefore, overruled. Consequently, these criminal appeals are disposed of with a direction to the concerned Magistrates to proceed accordingly." The facts noted above would go to show that it is the responsibility of the State officials to see and ensure that natural resources of the State is protected by the State officials and with such intent a full-fledged machinery has been set up, comprising large scale incumbents working in the mining department, and apart from the same police apparatus is also there to assist alongwith officials of other department also, who are drawing salary from the State exchequer and it appears that for obvious reasons, there is an active collusion in between the mining mafias and the officials of the Administration resulting in large scale illegal mining and thus causing apparent loss to the State exchequer. In the present case, the allegations that have come forward is that petitioner has indulged in illegal mining and accordingly, royalty and other dues are liable to be charged from him. Section 21(5) of the MMDR Act, 1957 clearly makes its intentions clear by empowering the State Government to recover rent, royalty or tax from the person who has raised the mineral from any land without any lawful authority and also empowers the State Government to recover the price thereof where such mineral has already been disposed of, inasmuch as, the same would not be available for seizure and confiscation. Apex Court in the case of Karnataka Rare Earth & another vs. Senior Geologist, Dept. of Mines and Geology and another AIR 2004 SC 2915 has clearly proceeded to make a mention that the said provision empowers the State Government to recover rent, royalty or tax and its underlying principle is that a person acting without any lawful authority must not find himself placed in a position more advantageous than a person raising minerals with lawful authority. The proceedings undertaken under Section 21(5) of MMDR Act, 1957 in-fact are recovery of price of the mineral intending to compensate the State for the loss of the mineral owned by it and caused by a person who was held not entitled in law to raise the same. Relevant extract of the judgement reads as follows:- "In our opinion, the demand by the State of Karnataka of the price of the mineral cannot be said to be levy of penalty or a penal action. The marginal note of the Section __ 'Penalties', creates a wrong impression. A reading of Section 21 shows that it deals with a variety of situations. Sub-Sections (1), (2), (4), (4A) and (6) are in the realm of criminal law. Sub-Section (3) empowers the State Government or any authority authorized in this behalf to summarily evict a trespasser. Sub-Section (5) empowers the State Government to recover rent, royalty or tax from the person who has raised the mineral from any land without any lawful authority and also empowers the State Government to recover the price thereof where such mineral has already been disposed of inasmuch as the same would not be available for seizure and confiscation. The provision as to recovery of price is in the nature of recovering the compensation and not penalty so also the power of the State Government to recover rent, royalty or tax in respect of any mineral raised without any lawful authority can also not be called a penal action. The underlying principle of sub-Section (5) is that a person acting without any lawful authority must not find himself placed in a position more advantageous than a person raising minerals with lawful authority. In the facts of this case, in spite of the judgment of the High Court, if the appellants would not have persuaded this Court to pass the interim orders, they would not have been entitled to operate the mining leases and to raise and remove and dispose of the minerals extracted. But for the interim orders passed by this Court, there is no difference between the appellants and any person raising, without any lawful authority, any mineral from any land, attracting applicability of sub-Section (5) of Section 21 . As the appellants have lost from the Court they cannot be allowed to retain the benefit earned by them under the interim orders of the Court. The High Court has rightly held the appellants liable to be placed in the same position in which they would have been if this Court would not have protected them by issuing interim orders. All that the State Government is demanding from the appellants is the price of the minor minerals. Rent, royalty or tax has already been recovered by the State Government and, therefore, there is no demand under that Head. No penal proceedings, much less any criminal proceedings, have been initiated against the appellants. It is absolutely incorrect to contend that the appellants are being asked to pay any penalty or are being subjected to any penal action. It is not the case of the appellants that they are being asked to pay a price more than what they have realised from the exports or that the price appointed by the respondent State is in any manner arbitrary or unreasonable. The Court while dismissing the appeals filed by the appellants in the year 1996, which dismissal vacated the interim orders, could have also relieved the appellants of the consequences logically and necessarily flowing from the dismissal of the appeals by taking into consideration the equity of relieving against hardship or could also have done so in exercise of its jurisdiction conferred by Article 142 of the Constitution. So was done in Samatha Vs. State of A.P. & Ors , (1997) 8 SCC 191, 277 para 131. This Court having directed the State Government to ensure further mining operations by industrialists concerned in the scheduled area, restrained the lessees of mining leases not to break fresh mines, but in the meanwhile allowed them to remove the minerals already extracted and stocked in the reserved forest area within four months' time from the date of judgment." Once there has been complaint of illegal mining, then certainly the said amount in question has to be recovered from the person, who was not entitled in law to raise such minerals but has proceeded to indulge in raising of such mineral without any authority of law, but the larger issue that is engaging our attention is as to what should be the procedure that is to be adhered at the point of time when such a liability is fastened on a incumbent, qua whom allegations have come forward that he has caused loss to the State by raising of minerals though he was not entitled in law to raise the same. Rate of royalty/dead rent is fixed under the provisions of MMDR Act and the Rules framed thereunder, the extent of illegal mining can be computed by making comprehensive survey and then assessing the quantity of mineral illegally raised, followed by quantification of the amount liable to be recovered and then proceeding to recover the same from the person responsible for such illegal mining. Before recovering the liability to be discharged is liable to be fastened on incumbent, who has purportedly caused loss to the State exchequer by raising the mineral. Qua the same a full-fledged mechanism is not at all there, in view of this, we posed specific query to the State as to in what way and manner, an incumbent, against whom financial liability is to be shouldered in lieu of illegal mining, is to be dealt with. Learned Standing Counsel has submitted that apart from the provisions quoted in the preceeding part of the judgement, there is no fixed criteria provided for and accordingly, action is taken by the State/Competent Authority by adhering to provide reasonable opportunity of hearing before forming formal conclusion. Law on the subject is clear that the exercise of power by public authority is always coupled with duty to fulfill the conditions of such exercise and the said responsibility in question has to be properly discharged and in the said direction, once there is procedure in place then action contemplated has to be done in a certain way or not at all, but once there is no specific procedure provided for as to in what way and manner for illegal mining, liability is to be fastened, then obviously in absence of Rules, fair procedure has to be followed. Here, in the present case, State is coming up with the case that petitioner has himself indulged in illegal mining whereas the petitioner, in his turn, is declining of being engaged in any illegal mining and contrarily, he claims himself to be a crusader against illegal activities and thus a victim. This is also an accepted position that on his complaint Apex Court has already taken cognizance in the matter against the incumbent, against whom he has made a complaint, but the fact of the matter is when fingers have been pointed at others, then counter finger has been pointed in the direction of petitioner also that he has tainted background and the fact of the matter is that he himself is Mining mafia. Apex Court in its order dated 25.04.2016, gives liberty to petitioner to respond to the notices before the Competent Authority, and the Competent Authority has been asked to bring the proceedings to its logical conclusion. In the present case as such, the petitioner is also burdened to get clean chit in the said direction once the Authorities on the spot even before the matter has been before Apex Court has initiated proceedings as against him. The Act /Rules in question do not contemplate or provide for a procedure to be adhered by the decision maker in the matter of fixing financial liability against incumbent engaged in illegal mining. Apex Court in the case of Managing Director ECIL, Hyderabad and others vs. B. Karunakar and others 1993(4) SCC 727 has held that in the absence of Rules, fair procedure is to be followed. Same is as follows: "Hence the incidental questions raised above may be answered as follows: (i) Since the denial of the report of the Inquiry Officer is a denial of reasonable opportunity and a breach of the principles of natural justice, it follows that the statutory rules, if any, which deny the report to the employee are against the principles of natural justice and, therefore, invalid. The delinquent employee will, therefore, be entitled to a copy of the report even if the statutory rules do not permit the furnishing of the report or are silent on the subject." Apex Court once again in the case of Style (Dress Land) vs. Union Territory Chandigarh and another 1999 (7) SCC 89 has held as follows:- "In the absence of the rules, the action of the respondents regarding imposition of terms and conditions of the lease including the enhancement of rent is required to be fair and reasonable and not actuated by considerations which could be termed as arbitrary or discriminatory. The government cannot act like a private individual in imposing the conditions solely with the object of extracting profits from their lessees. Governmental actions are required to be based on standards which are not arbitrary or unauthorised." Apex Court in the case of Bar Council of India vs. Union of India 2012 (8) SCC 243 has taken the view that once a dispute in question is to be decided, then on the quality of determination of dispute compromise cannot be made as it has to be objective, decide the dispute with fairness and follow the principal of natural justice and sense of justice and equity should continue to guide while conducting the proceedings while deciding the matter on merit. The alternative institutional mechanism in Chapter VI-A with regard to the disputes concerning public utility service is intended to provide an affordable, speedy and efficient mechanism to secure justice. By not making applicable the Code of Civil Procedure and the statutory provisions of the Indian Evidence Act , there is no compromise on the quality of determination of dispute since the Permanent Lok Adalat has to be objective, decide the dispute with fairness and follow the principles of natural justice. Sense of justice and equity continue to guide the Permanent Lok Adalat while conducting conciliation proceedings or when the conciliation proceedings fail, in deciding a dispute on merit. Thus law on the subject is clear that in case no procedure has been provided for as to in what way and manner the authority is to be exercised, then at the said point of time, the exercise of power by public authority has to be properly discharged i.e. it has to be decided with fairness and after following the principle of natural justice and the sense of justice and equity should continue to guide the Authorities concerned while conducting such proceedings in deciding the dispute on merit as the said decision in question would have large scale financial repercussions on the incumbent against whom proceedings in question have been initiated. Once such is the factual that there is no prescribed procedure provided for, then we proceed to examine the record in question that has been produced before us and that has been examined by us with the able assistance of learned Standing Counsel as well as the parties appearing before us and what we find from the record in question is that in the present case, pursuant to the order passed by the Apex Court, a detailed and elaborate reply has been submitted by the petitioner and at the point of time when the said reply in question has been considered, the District Magistrate concerned has proceeded to take note of notice dated 31.08.2012, notice dated 09.12.2014, notice dated 09.07.2015 and notice dated 08.09.2015. What we find from the record in question is that petitioner has proceeded to file a detailed and elaborate reply on 19.08.2016 clearly disowning therein of his involvement in illegal mining and has also proceeded to make a clear cut mention that it was impossible to believe that such large scale illegal mining has been carried out by the petitioner and not even a single mineral has been seized by the Authorities concerned. We have checked the original record produced before us and Annexure 12 to the Writ petition i.e. the reply submitted by the petitioner wherein qua each and every notice so issued detailed and elaborate reply, as already mentioned, has been furnished. Record in question reflects that notice dated 31.08.2012 issued by respondent no.6 disclose that petitioner was alleged to have mined illegally 108940 metric tonne of mineral. The said demand notice was based on spot inspection allegedly report dated 25.082012 and in the said notice in question, the incumbent from whom information was supplied was not mentioned. It was also not mentioned as to whether petitioner was on the spot when inspection was done and even the details of the event when illegal mining and transportation was done was also not mentioned. Paragraph 46 of the reply submitted by petitioner dealt with notice dated 30.08.2012. The said reply is as follows:- "46- uksfVl la0 1071 fnukad 30-08-2012 ds lEcU/k esa mRrj fuEu izdkj gSA mDr dfFkr uksfVl Mk0 lrh'k dqekj izk0la0 ¼jlk½@[kku vf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj dh vksj ls fnukad 31-08-2012 i=kad la0 1071 }kjk 108940 ?kuehVj voS/k [kuu izkFkhZ }kjk djuk dfFkr fd;k x;k gSA tks [kku ,oa [kfut fodkl vf/kfu;e 1957 dh /kkjk 21¼1½ o 21¼5½ ds vUrZxr tkjh djuk dfFkr gSA ftlesa jk;YVh o [kfut ewY; 3]59]50]200 o 25000@& tqekZuk dqy 3]59]75]200@& dfFkr djrs gq, 10 fnu esa Li"Vhdj.k pkgk x;k dfFkr gS tokc u nsus ds fLFfr esa /kujkf'k dks Hkw jktLo dh {kfr olwy djus vFkok ifjokn nk;j djus dh dk;Zokgh ds fy, dfFkr gSA mDr uksfVl esa Mk0 lrh'k dqekj dks [kku vf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj n'kkZ;k x;k Mk0 lrh'k dqekj [kku vf/kdkjh ugh gS og dsoy izk0la0 ¼jlk0½ gS vkSj mDr O;fDr dks [kku [kfut vf/kfu;e 1957 ds vUrZxr esa voS/k [kuu dh tkWp ;k uksfVl tkjh djus dk dksbZ vf/kdkj izkIr ugh gSA izk0la0 ¼jlk0½ lfoZl :y ds vUrZxr vyx dsMj gSA izk0la0 ¼jlk;u½ fcYdqy vyx iksLV gS o vksj vyx fu;eksa ds vUrZxr 'krsZ gksrh gSA mldh ;ksX;rk vyx gS vkSj fu;eksa esa [kku vf/kdkjh dh ;ksX;rk vyx gS vkSj fdlh Hkh izdkj fu;eksa esa izk0lk0 ¼jlk0½ [kku vf/kdkjh ugh cu ldrk gS vkSj u mldk dksbZ dk;Z dj ldrk gSA mudk vyx dk;Z gS vkSj og jktif=r vf/kdkjh ugh gSA uksfVl ij [kku vf/kdkjh xyr vkSj /kks[kk/kM+h dh fu;r ls fy[kk x;k gSA ;g ,d cM+h /kks[kk/kM+h gSA Mk0 lq'khy dqekj izk0l0 ¼jlk0½ }kjk vius gLrk{kj ds vkxs frfFk dk mYys[k fd;k tkrk gS ysfdu mDr uksfVl ij tks gLrk{kj cuk;s x;s gS mu ij frfFk dk mYys[k ugh gS D;ksafd fnukad fy[kus esa gS.MjkbZfVax Li"V gks tkrhA mDr uksfVl ij dgha ij mYys[k ugh gS fd Mkd }kjk Hkstk tk jgk gSA vkSj u gh bldh izfr fdlh mPp vf/kdkjh dks Hksth xbZ gS vkSj u gh dk;Z vuqefr yh xbZ gS vkSj u gh rkfey djus ds fy, rglhy Hksth xbZ gS uksfVl ls Li"V gS fd QthZ cuk;k x;k gS cSd MsV Mkyh xbZ gSA mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl ij rRdkyhu dfFkr [kku vf/kdkjh ds gLrk{kj QthZ fd;s x;s gS ftudh QkWjsfUld tkWp djk;h tk ldrh gS tks O;fDr gS mldks [kku vf/kdkjh fn[kk;k x;k gSA uksfVl fnukad 31-08-2012 dks fujh{k.k djuk fn[kk;k x;k tcfd izkFkhZ dk xkWo ;equk fdukjs ij gS vkSj vlyeiqj cjFkk xkWo Hkh ;equk fdukjs ij gS vxLr esa ;equk esa QYM cuk jgrk gS ,sls esa tkWpdrkZ }kjk tkWp djuk fcYdqy vfo'oluh; gS rFkkdfFkr uksfVl esa ;g dguk fd 108940 ?kuehVj dk voS/k [kuu gksuk ik;k tkuk fcYdqy vfo'oluh; gS D;ksafd 108940 ?kuehVj [kuu yxHkx 12000 Vªd es yksM gks ldrs gSA bl izdkj yxHkx 12 gtkj Vªd voS/k [kuu dj ys tkuk vius vki esa >wBk lkfcr djrk gS vkSj iwjs ftys esa ,d Hkh Vªd dk u idM+k tkuk vius vkiesa lafnX/k gS ;g bruk cM+k [kuu dgkW ls dj x;k gSA 1- ;g fd izkFkhZ dks mDr uksfVl igys dHkh Hkh izkIr ugh djk;k x;k gSA izkFkhZ dks tkjh dfFkr uksfVl [kku [kfut vf/kfu;e 1957 dh /kkjk 21¼5½ ds vUrxZr izk0l0 ¼jlk0½ [kku vf/kdkjh }kjk tkjh fd;k x;k gSA mDr /kkjk 21¼5½ ds vUrZxr mRrj izns'k esa dksbZ vf/kdkjh /kkjk 26 ds vUrZxr vkt rd vf/kd`r ugh gS uksfVl fcuk vf/kdkjh ds gS tks 'kwU; gSA 2- ;g fd rFkkdfFkr uksfVl QthZ gS ;g fnukad 12-12-2015 ds ckn [kfut foHkkx vkSj [kuu ekfQ;k dh fefyHkxr ls QthZ gLrk{kj dj cukdj fjdkWMZ ij yk;k x;k gS 12-12-2015 tks fd layXud ua0 27 gS funs'kd ds vkns'k ij Hksts x;s tkWp ny }kjk izLrqr la;qDr tkWp vk[;k dh tkWp fjiksVZ esa bldk fooj.k o uksfVl dh izfr ekStwn ugh gS D;ksafd ;g fjdkWMZ ij ugh Fkk ;fn ekStwn gksrk rks og ml fjiksVZ ds lkFk layXu gksrkA 3- ;g fd Jheku eq[; lfpo }kjk ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; esa tufgr fjV ;kfpdk la0 5507@2015 es 'kiFk i= izLrqr fd;k x;k ysfdu esjs fo:) dksbZ voS/k [kuu dk vkjksi ugh yxk;k x;k vkSj u gh ,slk dksbZ uksfVl ekuuh; U;k;ky; esa izLrqr fd;k x;kA 4- ;g fd xqjizhr flag cXxk us ,d vks0,0 ua0 184@2013 ,d lwV ekuuh; jk"Vªh; gfjr U;k;kf/kdj.k ds le{k izLrqr fd;k Fkk bl lwV esa lgkjuiqj ds ftykf/kdkjh rFkk [kku vf/kdkjh o vU; pkj O;fDr foi{khx.k gS bl ekeys esa Hkh ljdkj }kjk lgkjuiqj esa voS/k [kuu djus okyksa dk fooj.k nkf[ky fd;k x;k Fkk ml fooj.k esa Hkh izkFkhZ dk uke ugh Fkk ;fn izkFkhZ us dHkh dksbZ voS/k [kuu fdlh Hkh izdkj fd;k gksrk rks mDr ljdkj }kjk izLrqr lwph@fooj.k esa izkFkhZ dk uke vko'; gksrkA 5- ;g fd fnukad 26-08-2015 dks rRdkyhu Jheku ftykf/kdkjh] lgkjuiqj }kjk Jheku izeq[k lfpo] Jheku funs'kd o Jheku vk;qDr lgkjuiqj dks voS/k [kuu tkWp fjiksVZ Hksth xbZ ftlesa leLr voS/k [kuu ds fjdkWMZ lfgr Hkstk x;k ysfdu dfFkr uksfVl mDr fjdkWMZ ds lkFk Hkh layXu ugh Fkk D;ksafd ;g QthZ gS vkSj ckn esa cuk;k x;k gSA 6- ;g fd lksuw iq= Jh tlchj flag us ,d flfoy feLlysfu;l fjV ;kfpdk la0 3927@2016 ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; bykgkckn esa nkf[ky dh xbZ Fkh mDr fjV esa ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj] [kuu vf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj] dfe'kuj lgkjuiqj] ofj"B iqfyl v/kh{kd lgkjuiqj ds vykok dqy 14 foi{khx.k Fks mDr fjV esa ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj Jh iou dqekj }kjk fnukad 11-03-2016 dks ,d 'kiFk i= izLrqr fd;k Fkk bl 'kiFk i= ds lkFk ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj us ,d lwph nkf[ky dh Fkh ftlesa fnukad 01-04-2012 ls Qjojh 2016 rd dh voS/k [kuu djus okyksa dh nkf[ky dh Fkh rFkk muds fo:) tks dk;Zokgh dh Fkh mDr lwph esa of.kZr Fkk rFkk ftu ftu yksxksa dks voS/k [kuu dk uksfVl izsf"kr fd;k x;k Fkk og Hkh bl lwph esa of.kZr gS tks fd fjekWdZ~l okys dkWye esa gSA bl iw.kZ lwph esa izkFkhZ dk uke dgha Hkh fdlh Hkh izdkj dk ugh gSA ;fn izkFkhZ us dksbZ voS/k [kuu bl vof/k esa fd;k gksrk rks izkFkhZ dk uke bl lwph esa ykteh gksrkA ;fn dksbZ uksfVl voS/k [kuu dk Hkh dk;kZy; }kjk izkFkhZ ds fo:) tkjh fd;k gksrk rks mldk fooj.k Hkh ml lwph esa fuf'pr gksrkA tcfd bl lwph esa izkFkhZ dk uke ugh gS u gh ftu yksxksa dks uksfVl fn;k x;k gS ml dkWye esa Hkh izkFkhZ dk uke ugh gSA ;fn izkFkhZ dks ;g rFkkdfFkr 4 uksfVl ftudh 1& uksfVl la[;k 1071 fnukafdr 31-08-2012 2& uksfVl la[;k 505@3] fnukafdr 09-12-2014 3& uksfVl la[;k 1202 fnukafdr 09-07-2015 7- uksfVl la[;k 1269 fnukafdr 08-09-2015 fn;s ;s gksrs rks budk fooj.k Jheku~ ftykf/kdkjh Jh iou dqekj }kjk izLrqr vius gyQukesa esa fuf'pr gksrkA mDr 'kiFk i= bl izkFkZuk i= ds lkFk layXud 37 gSA 8- ;g fd izkFkhZ }kjk Lo;a ekuuh; loksZPp U;k;ky; ds vkns'k fnukad 14-12-2015 ds vuqikyu gsrq Jheku ftykf/kdkjh ls izkFkhZ ds fo:) tkfrxr voS/k [kuu ds uksfVl fd izfr jftLVMZ Mkd ls ekaxh xbZ rFkk vkj0Vh0vkbZ0 ds }kjk Hkh ekaxh xbZ mDr izkFkZuk i= rFkk vkj0Vh0vkbZ0 }kjk ekaxh xbZ lwpuk izkFkZuk i= ds lkFk crkSj layXud ua0 32 gSA ijUrq [kku vf/kdkjh Jh jkt dqekj laxe }kjk izkFkhZ dks u rks rFkkdfFkr uksfVl dh izfr nh xbZ u gh izkFkhZ }kjk pkgh xbZ vkj0Vh0vkbZ0 lwpuk tks fd izkFkZuk i= ds lkFk iwoZ esa nkf[ky layXud ua0 32 gSA dh izfr miyC/k djkrs gq, fnukad 01-01-2016 dks jftLVZM Mkd }kjk vkj0Vh0vkbZ0 esa dfFkr uksfVlksa dh lwpuk ekaxh xbZ ysfdu miyC/k ugh djk;h xbZA 9- ;g fd Jheku ftykf/kdkjh egksn; }kjk Lo;a ekuuh; loksZPp U;k;ky; esa viuk 'kiFk i= izLrqr fd;k x;k ysfdu mlds lkFk Hkh dksbZ dfFkr uksfVl dh izfr layXu ugh dh xbZA ekuuh; loksZPp U;k;ky; ds vkns'k fnukad 25-04-2016 ds vkns'k ds ckotwn Hkh izkFkhZ dks ;k izkFkhZ ds vf/koDrk dks dfFkr uksfVl izkIr ugh djk;k x;kA 10- ;g fd mijksDr rF;ksa ls Li"V gS fd ;g uksfVl fjdkWMZ ij ekStwn ugh Fkk dsoy QthZ fQxj fn[kkbZ xbZ vkSj vc bldks QthZ rS;kj fd;k x;k ftldks vlyh dh rjg bLrseky fd;k tk jgk gS tks vijkf/kd ekeyk curk gS blesa [kfut foHkkx ds yksx o [kuu ekfQ;k ds yksxksa us feydj "kM;U= fd;k gS [kfut foHkkx us blds fo"k; esa mPp vf/kdkfj;ksa dks xqejkg fd;k gSA 11- ;g fd ekSds ij dksbZ loZ dHkh Hkh izkFkhZ dh ekStwnxh esa ugh fd;k x;k izkFkhZ }kjk dHkh dksbZ oS| ;k voS/k [kuu ugh fd;k x;k gSA dfFkr uksfVl esa dksbZ fooj.k [kljk ua0 [kuu dk LFkku ugh fn[kk;k x;k gS dksbZ izek.k voS/k [kuu dk ugh gS vkSj u gh dksbZ xokg n'kkZ;k x;k gS vkSj u gh mlesa voS/k [kuu fdl [kfut dk fn[kk;k dksbZ uke ugh gS vkadyu fdl izdkj fdl vk/kkj ij fd;k x;k dksbZ fooj.k ugh gSA 12- ;g fd izkFkhZ ds }kjk ,d tufgr ;kfpdk la0 5507@2015 ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky;] y[kuÅ esa nk;j dh xbZ ftlesa ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; us ftyk lgkjuiqj esa [kuu dks iw.kZr;% izfrcfU/kr dj fn;k Fkk ftlls [kuu ekfQ;kvksa dk [kuu dk;Z izHkkfor gqvkA mlds ckn [kuu ekfQ;k ds dkys /ku dh tkWp gsrq izkFkhZ us ekuuh; loksZPp U;k;ky; esa tufgr ;kfpdk 818@2015 izLrqr dh ftlesa ekuuh; loksZPp U;k;ky; us [kuu ekfQ;k ds dkys /ku ds fo:) tkWp ds vkns'k ikfjr fd;s bl vkns'k ls ijs'kku gksdj [kuu ekfQ;k us [kftu foHkkx lgkjuiqj ls lkt dj cSd MsV esa ;g QthZ uksfVl 1071 fnukafdr 31-08-2012 rS;kj fd;k bl QthZ uksfVl ds vk/kkj ij izkFkhZ ds fo:) dksbZ dk;Zokgh ugh dh tk ldrhA ;g uksfVl fujLr gksus ;ksX; gSA 13- ;g fd mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl cSd MsV esa QthZ rkSj ij rS;kj fd;k x;k gS ;fn ftl dEi;wVj ls ;g rS;kj fd;k x;k gS mldh gkMZ fMLd dh tkap dh tk, rks mlls ;g irk py tk,xk fd ;g uksfVl fdl fnukadk dks cuk;k x;k gS rFkk ftl dEi;wVj ds }kjk ;g uksfVl cuk;k x;k gS mldh QkWjsfUld tkWp dh tkuh vko';d gS rFkk mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl esa bLrseky gq, fjdkWMZ ls dkxtksa ls feyku] ml fnu ds VkbZi vkSj dkxtkr ls feyku] ml fnu ftl fizUVj ls bldks Nkik x;k gS mlds Nis nwljs dkxtksa ls feyku fd;k tk ldrk gS o dEi;wVj dh gkMZ fMLdh dh tkWp djk;h tk ldrh gS fd ;g uksfVl ljdkjh dEi;wVj ij dc VkbZi fd;k x;k gS vkSj fdlus fd;k gSA uksfVl ua0 ftl gSM jkbZfVax esa fy[kk x;k gS ml fnu ds nwljs dkxtksa ij feyku fd;k tk ldrk gSA 14- ;g fd ftl jftLVj esa ;g uksfVl ntZ fd;k x;k gS mlesa Hkh gsjkQsjh dh xbZ gS rFkk fjdkWMZ ds lkFk NsM+[kkuh dh xbZ gSA 15- ;g fd ;g uksfVl vf/kfu;e 1957 dh /kkjkvksa ds vUrxZr fn;k x;k gSA /kkjk 23ch o 21 ¼5½] 21¼4½ ds vUrxZr [kku vf/kdkjh vf/kd`r ugh gSA 4 o"kZ igyk uksfVl dfFkr fd;k tk jgk gS ysfdu vkt rd dksbZ dk;Zokgh u n'kkZuk vius vki esa QthZ dk;Zogh gSA" Paragraph 47 of the reply dealt with notice dated 09.12.2014 as follows:- "47- dfFkr uksfVl la0 505@3 fnukad 09-12-2014 :0 526680@ ds lEcU/k esa fuEu izdkj gS & ;g fd mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl esa v/kksgLrk{kjh }kjk Hk.Mkj.k n'kkZ;k x;k gSA mDr dfFkr uksfVl dHkh Hkh izkFkhZ dks izkIr ugh djk;k x;k gS izkFkhZ }kjk fjV ;kfpdk la0 5507@2015 ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; y[kuÅ esa nk;j dh xbZ Fkh ftlesa fnukad 25-06-2015 dks ekuuh; mPp y[kuÅ us ftyk lgkjiqj esa leLr [kuu ij jksd yxk;h xbZ rks [kuu iVVs /kkjd }kjk ;g uksfVl ekuuh; mPp u;k;ky; y[kuÅ ds le{k fnukad 13-07-2015 dks fn[kk;k x;k tgka ij jkT; ljdkj o Jheku~ ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj Hkh i{k FksA ml oDr Hkh izkFkhZ ds vf/koDrk }kjk rHkh Li"V fd;k x;k fd izkFkhZ dks dHkh mDr uksfVl izkIr ugha gqvk u gh izkFkhZ dk egky{eh LVksu dzs'kj ls dksbZ lEcU/k fdlh izdkj dk ugha gSA ;g tkudkjh esa vkus ds ckn Hkh jkT; ljdkj }kjk izkFkhZ dksbZ uksfVl izkIr ugha djk;k x;k vkSj u gh Jheku~ eq[; lfpo }kjk fnukad 07-07-2015 dks fdlh voS/k [kuu dk mYys[k vius 'kiFk i= esa fd;k x;k FkkA eq[; lfpo }kjk izLrqr 'kiFk i= bl izkFkZuk i= ds lkFk layXud ua0 13 gS A ;g uksfVl [kuu ekfQ;kvksa us [kfut foHkkx ds deZpkjh o vf/kdkfj;ksa ls feydj "kM;a= dj cSd MsV esa cuk;k x;k rkfd U;k;ky; esa eq>s voS/k [kuu djus okyk dfFkr dj ;kfpdk [kfjt djk;h tk ldsA izkFkhZ }kjk fnukad 01-01-2016 esa iathd`r Mkd ls vkjVhvkbZ esa vius fo:) dh xbZ leLr dk;Zokgh dh lwpuk ekaxh xbZ ysfdu izkFkhZ dks tkucw> dj dksbZ lwpuk miyC/k ugha djk; xbZA D;ksafd ;g lc nLrkost QthZ cuk;s x;s Fks ftlds izek.k izkFkhZ ds ikl nLrkosftd gSA 1- ;g fd izkFkhZ dks tkjh dfFkr uksfVl [kku [kfut vf/kfu;e 1957 /kkjk 21 ¼5½ ds vUrxZr [kku vf/kdkjh }kjk tkjh fd;k x;k gSA mDr /kkjk 21 ¼5½ ds vUrxZr mRrj izns'k esa dksbZ vf/kdkjh /kkjk 26 ds vUrxZr vkt rFkk vf/kd`r ugha gS uksfVl fcuk vf/kdkj ds gS tks 'kwU; gSA 2- ;g fd xqjizhr flag cXxk us ,d vks0,0 ua0 184@2013 ,d lwV ekuuh; jk"Vªh; gfjr U;k;kf/kdj.k ds le{k izLrqr fd;k Fkk bl lwV esa lgkjuiqj ds ftykf/kdkjh rFkk [kku vf/kdkjh o vU; pkj O;fDr foi{khx.k gS bl ekeys esa Hkh ljdkj }kjk lgkjuiqj esa voS/k [kuu djus okyksa dk fooj.k nkf[ky fd;k x;k Fkk ml fooj.k esa Hkh izkFkhZ dk uke ugha Fkk ;fn izkFkhZ us dHkh dksbZ voS/k [kuu fdlh Hkh izdkj fd;k gksrk rks mDr ljdkj }kjk izLrqr lwfp@fooj.k esa izkFkhZ dk uke vo'; gksrkA 3- ;g fd lksuw dqekj iq= Jh tlchj flag us ,d flfoy feLysfu;l fjV ;kfpdk la0 3927@2016 ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; bykgkckn esa nkf[ky dh xbZ Fkh mDr fjV esa ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj] [kuu vf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj] dfe'kuj lgkjuiqj] ofj"B iqfyl vf/k{kd lgkjuiqj ds vykok dqy 14 foi{khx.k Fks mDr fjV esa ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj Jh iou dqekj }kjk fnukad 11-03-2016 dks ,d 'kiFk i= izLrqr fd;k Fkk bl 'kiFk i= ds lkFk ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj us ,d lwph nkf[ky dh Fkh ftlesa fnukad 01-04-2012 ls Qjojh 2016 rd dh voS/k [kuu djus okyksa dh nkf[ky dh Fkh rFkk muds fo:) tks dk;Zokgh dh Fkh mDr lwph esa of.kZr Fkk rFkk ftu ftu yksxksa dks voS/k [kuu dk uksfVl izsf"kr fd;k x;k Fkk og Hkh bl lwph esa of.kZr gS tks fd fuekWdZl~ okys dkWye esa gSA bl iw.kZ lwph esa izkFkhZ dk uke dgha Hkh fdlh Hkh izdkj dk ugha gSA ;fn izkFkhZ us dksbZ voS/k [kuu bl vof/k esa fd;k gksrk rks izkFkhZ dk uke bl lwph esa ykteh gksrkA ;fn dksbZ uksfVl voS/k [kuu dk Hkh dk;kZy; }kjk izkFkhZ ds fc:) tkjh fd;k gksrk rks mldk fooj.k Hkh mlh lwph esa fuf'pr gksrkA tcfd bl lwph esa izkFkhZ dk uke ugha gS u gh ftu yksxksa dks uksfVl fn;k x;k gS ml dkWye esa Hkh izkFkhZ dk uke ugha gSA ;fn izkFkhZ dks ;g rFkkdfFkr 4 uksfVl ftudh 1- uksfVl la[;k 1071 fnukafdr 31-08-2012 2- uksfVl la[;k 505@03] fnukafdr 09-12-2014 3- uksfVl la[;k 1202 fnukafdr 09-07-2015 4- uksfVl la[;k 1269 fnukafdr 08-09-2015 fn;s x;s gksrs rks budk fooj.k ftykf/kdkjh iou dqekj }kjk izLrqr vius gYQukesa esa fuf'pr gksrkA mDr 'kiFk i= bl izkFkZuk i= ds lkFk layXud 37 gS A 4- ;g fd mDr rFkkdfFkr QthZ uksfVl tks izkFkhZ dks nsuk crk;k x;k gS ljklj >wBk gS [kku vf/kdkjh }kjk dHkh Hkh dksbZ losZ ugha fd;k x;k gS D;ksafd losZ djus ds Hkh fu;e o dkuwu gS tc Hkh fdlh voS/k [kuu dh ckcr dksbZ vf/kdkjh dgha losZ djrk gS rks losZ ds LFkku ij ftl O;fDr ds fo:) dk;Zokgh gksuh gS ml O;fDr dk ml LFkku ij gksuk vfuok;Z gS ;fn bldh vogsyuk gksrh gS rks ;g dk;Zokgh QthZ gksrh gSA 5- ;g fd mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl esa ;g dgh of.kZr ugh fd;k x;k gS fd fdl [kljk ua0 ij voS[k [kuu gksuk ik;k x;k gS rFkk fdl LFkku ij voS/k [kuu gksuk ik;k x;k gS bl pht dk dksbZ mYys[k rFkk dfFkr uksfVl esa ugha gS rFkk bl uksfVl esa ;g Hkh ugha gS fdl [kfut dk Hk.Mkj.k fd;k x;k gS bl vk/kkj ij Hkh mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl [kf.Mr gksus ;ksX; gSA 6- ;g fd izkFkhZ ds }kjk tufgr ;kfpdk nk;j dh xbZ ftlls [kuu ekfQ;kvksa dk [kuu dk;Z izHkkfor gqvkA mlds ckn [kuu ekfQ;k ds dkys /ku dh tkWp ekuuh; loksZPp U;k;ky; us tkWp ds vkns'k nsus x;s ftlls ijs'kku gksdj [kfut foHkkx o [kuu ekfQ;k us feydj "kM;a= dj ;g QthZ uksfVl rS;kj fd;k x;k gS ftlds vk/kkj ij izkFkhZ ds mij dksbZ voS/k [kuu dk vkjksi ugh fd;k tk ldrk vkSj dksbZ ekWx ugh dh tk ldrh gSA 7- ;g fd mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl esa irk pyrk gS fd mDr uksfVl ij rRdkyhu [kku vf/kdkjh ds gLrk{kj QthZ fd;s x;s gSA ftudh QkWjsfUld tkWp djk;h tk ldrh gSA 8- ;g fd mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl cSd MsV esa QthZ rkSj ij rS;kj fd;k x;k gS ;fn ftl dEi;wVj ls ;g rS;kj fd;k x;k gS mldh gkMZ fMLd dh tkWp dh tk, rks mlls ;g irk py tk,xk fd ;g uksfVl fdl fnukad dks cuk;k x;k gS rFkk ftl dEi;wVj ds }kjk ;g uksfVl cuk;k x;k gS mldh QkWjsfUld tkWp dh tkuh vko';d gS rFkk mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVl esa bLrseky gq, fjdkWMZ ls dkxtksa ls feyku] ml fnu ds VkbZi vkSj dkxtkr ls feyku] ml fnu ftl fizUVj ls bldks Nkik x;k gS mlds Nis nwljs dkxtksa ls feyku fd;k tk ldrk gS o dEi;wVj dh gkMZ fMLd dh tkWp djk;h tk ldrh gS fd ;g uksfVl ljdkjh dEi;wVj ij dc VkbZi fd;k x;k gS vkSj fdlus fd;k gSA uksfVl ua0 ftl gSM jkbZfVax esa fy[kk x;k gS ml fnu ds nwljs dkxtksa ij feyku fd;k tk ldrk gSA 9- ;g fd mDr rFkkdfFkr uksfVlksa ds vykok uks tksfVl ml fnu vU; O;fDr;ksa dks fn;s x;s mudh gSaV jkbZfVax bu uksfVlksa ls fHkUu gSA 10- ;g fd ftl jftLVj esa ;g uksfVl ntZ fd;k x;k gS mlesa Hkh gsjkQsjh dh xbZ gS rFkk fjdkWMZ ds lkFk NsM+[kkuh dh xbZ gSA 11- ;g fd mDr uksfVl dks tkjh djus ls iwoZ fdlh mPp vf/kdkjh ls vuqefr ugh yh xbZ gSA 12- ;g fd [kku vf/kdkjh ds gLrk{kj ds uhps fnukad vafdr ugh gS tcfd [kku vf/kdkjh tc Hkh gLrk{kj djrs gS og vius gLrk{kj ds uhps frfFk t:j vafdr djrs gS ijUrq bu rFkkdfFkr uksfVlksa es [kku vf/kdkjh ds gLrk{kj ds uhps frfFk vafdr ugh gS rFkk izFke n`f"V;k ns[kus ls ;g izrhr gksrk gS fd [kku vf/kdkjh ds gLr{kj fHkUu fHkUu gSA 13- ;g fd uksfVl esa fdlh dks izfrfyfi ugh Hksth xbZ gSA ;g uksfVl lksph le>h fefyHkxr dj "kM;a= ds vUrxZr cukdj fooj.k loksZPp U;k;ky; ds le{k izLrqr fd;k x;k gSA 14- ;g fd izkFkhZ dks ;g uksfVl fcuk fdlh tkudkjh fd;s iszf"kr fd;k x;k gS D;ksafd uksfVl ij tks egky{eh LVksu dzs'kj dk mYys[k fd;k x;k gS og izkFkhZ dk ugh gS izkFkhZ dk mDr egky{eh LVksu dzs'kj ls dksbZ okLrk fdlh izdkj dk ugh gSA 15- ;g fd dfFkr uksfVl esa 1596 ?kuehVj voS/k [kuu dj mi[kfut Hk.Mkj.k fn[kk;k x;k gS fd dkSu lk [kfut Fkk mYys[k ugh gS fdl dh ekStwnxh esa fufj{k.k fd;k x;k dksbZ fooj.k ugha gS okLro esa dksbZ fufj{k.k ugh fd;k x;k gSA izkFkhZ us tc egky{eh LVksu dzs'ku ds ckjs esa ekywekr dh rc irk pyk fd mDr egky{eh LVksu dzs'kj fdlh lqjs'k dqekj R;kxh dk gSA izkFkhZ dk blls dksbZ eryc okLrk fdlh izdkj dk ugh gSA 16- ;g fd dfFkr uksfVl ij 505@3 uEcj Mkyk x;k gS tcfd cVs ¼@½ esa uEcj Mkyus dk dksbZ izko/kku ;k O;ogkj ugh gS ysfdu fjdkWMZ ds voyksdu ls tkudkjh gks jgh gS fd ftu yksxksa ds cSd MsV esa uksfVl cuk;s tkrs gS rks fdlh uksfVl dk cVk cuk;k tkrk gS vkSj ml ij cVs c<+k;s tkrs jgrs gS tcfd blls iwoZ dHkh Hkh cVksa esa fdlh dks uksfVl ugh fn;k x;k gSA flQZ ;fn fdlh dks cSd MsV esa uksfVl fn;k n'kkZuk gksrk gS rc ;g yksx fdlh Hkh la[;k ds lkFk cVs Mky dj mDr uksfVl dh ,UVªh dj nsrs gSA blls lkQ izrhr gksrk gS fd ek= izkFkhZ ij utk;t ncko Mkyus dh fu;r ls [kuu ekfQ;k ds lkFk lkt dj izkFkhZ ds fo:) mDr QthZ uksfVl izsf"kr fd;k x;kA 17- ;g fd ;fn [kuu foHkkx lgkjiqj ds fjdkWMksZ dk fujh{k.k fd;k tk, ml fjdkWMZ ls irk py tk,xk fd [kuu foHkkx us fjdkWMZ ds lkFk NsM+ NkM+ dh gS fd funksZ"k O;fDr;ksa ds fOk:/k ftUgksus us Hkh [kuu ekfQ;kvksa ds fo:/k vkokt mBk;h mu yksxksa dks [kuu foHkkx }kjk mDr QthZ uksfVl izsf"kr fd;s x;s rkfd og [kuu ekfQ;k ds fo:/k fdlh Hkh rjg ls vkokt mBk,a vkSj u gh fdlh l{ke U;k;ky; esa dk;Zokgh u dj ldsA blh rjg uksfVl la[;k 505@1 fnukafdr 09-12-2014] 505@2 fnukafdr 09-12-2014] 505@3 fnukafdr 09-12-2014 o 505@4 fnukafdr 09-12-2014 ;g lc uksfVl [kuu vf/kdkjh }kjk mu lc yksxksa dks Hksts x;s ftUgksus [kuu ekfQ;k rFkk ftyk lgkjuiqj esa gks jgs voS/k [kuu ds fo:/k vkokt mBk;h ;k U;k;ky;ksa esa buds fo:/k dsl nkf[ky fd;s bu yksxksa dh vkokt nckus ds fy, rFkk ;s yksx vius eqdneksa esa ¼tks bUgksus [kuu ekfQ;k rFkk [kuu foHkkx ds fo:/k dj j[ks gS½ iSjksdkjh u djsa ;k eqdnesa okfil ys ysaA mijksDr pkjkas uksfVl cSd MsV esa 505 esa cVk cukdj cuk;s x;s gSA 505@2 jkefd'ku }kjk ekuuh; loksZPPk U;k;ky; esa tufgr fjV ;kfpdk nk;j dh xbZ Fkh vkSj tUrj eUrj ij izn'kZu djus ds fy, vkUnksyu fd;k x;k mlds uke ls 30-12-2014 dks [kuu ekfQ;k us vius ikl voS/kkfud tqekZuk tek djk;k rkfd ;g dgk tk lds fd blus viuk tqeZ Lohdkj fd;kA 505@1 xq: n;ky ;g jke fd'ku dh lkFkh Fkk blfy, blds uke Hkh voS/k [kuu dk uksfVl fjdkWM ij cuk;k x;kA 505@3 tc izkFkhZ us ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; y[kuÅ es fjV ;kfpdk la0 5507@2015 Mkyh rks izkFkhZ ds fo:/k tkSykbZ 2015 esa cSd MsV esa uksfVl cuk;k x;kA 505@4 tc fo'okl dqekj lso bfUM;k xzqi ds lqHkk"k dqekj pkS/kjh dk lxk HkkbZ gS rks mlds uke QthZ uksfVl rS;kj fd;k x;k mDr rF;ksa ls Li"V gS fd fdl izdkj QthZ uksfVl rS;kj dj [kfut foHkkx o [kuu ekfQ;k us "kM;U= dj fjdkWMZ ij yxk;s gSA mDr uksfVl vyx vyx le; ij cus gS ,d gh frfFk es fn[kk;s gSA muds Åij nks uksfVlksa ij dkj.k crkvksa uksfVl fy[kk gS** nks ij ugh fy[kk gS tcfd ;g uksfVl Hkh fo'okl dqekj dks vkt rd izkIr ugh gqvk gSA nks uksfVl 505@1 o 505@2 ,d tSls yxrs gS 505@3 vyx QksUV lkbZt gS uEcj vyx jkbZfVax esa gS mldk dkxt Hkh 505@4 Hkh vyx gSA ,d gh fnu ,d gh uEcj ij lc dqN vyx vyx gS ,slk tkWp es Li"V gks tk,xk ;g lc QthZ vkSj cSd MsV dk cuk;s x;s gSA dksbZ izek.k ,slk ugh gS fd esjs }kjk dksbZ voS/k [kuu fd;k x;k gS fcuk izek.k izkFkhZ ds fo:/k dksbZ ekax ugh dh tk ldrh gSA mijksDr pkjksa uksfVlksa dh QksVks LVsV izfr layXud ua047 gSA uksfVl vf/kfu;e 1957 dh /kkjk 21¼5½ ds vUrZxr fn;k x;k vf/kfu;e 1957 esa uksfVl tkjh djus o tkWp djus ds fy, [kku vf/kdkjh vf/kd`r ugh gS uksfVl 'kwU; gS fcuk vf/kdkj ds tkjh fd;k x;k gSA" Paragraph 48 of the reply dealt with notice dated 09.07.2015 as follows:- "48- dfFkr uksfVl fnukad 09-07-2015 i=kad Lka0 1202@[kfut@2015&16 dk tokc fuEu izdkj gS & ;g fd [kku vf/kdkjh Jh jktdqekj laxe }kjk fnukafdr 09-07-2015 dks ftl uksfVl dk mYys[k fd;k x;k gS bl frfFk dks jkt dqekj laxe }kjk dksbZ uksfVl fdlh Hkh izdkj dk ugh fn;k x;k gS ftl ia=kd la[;k 1202@[kfut@2015&16 dks ftykf/kdkjh dk;kZy; [kuu vuqHkkx uksfVl gksuk dg jgk gS og uksfVl u gksdj izkFkhZ ds fo:/k [kku vf/kdkjh jktdqekj laxe us Fkkuk v/;{k Fkkuk fpydkuk esa izkFkhZ ds fo:/k ,d rgjhj gS ftlesa izkFkhZ ds fo:/k 4@21 [kku ,ao [kfut vf/kfu;e o 379@411 vkbZihlh dh /kkjk esa eqdnek iathdj.k djus gsrq gSA ;g fd blh rgjhj fnukafdr 09-07-2015 ds rgr izkFkhZ ds fo:/k Fkkuk fpydkuk esa ,d eqdnek vijk/k la[;k 160@2015 ljdkj cuke j.kohj flag vUMj lSD'ku 4@21 ekbZUl ,.M fefujYl ,DV o 379 vkbZihlh iathd`r gqvk bl eqdnesa esa foospd }kjk ;g ikrs gq, QkbZuy fjiksVZ yxk nh xbZ fd j.kohj flag }kjk voS/k [kuu ds fo:/k ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; esa ,d fjV la[;k 5507@2015 nk;j dh xbZ Fkh ftlesa ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; us vius vkns'k fnukafdr 25-06-2015 dks [kuu ij jksd yxk nh Fkh ftlls [kuu ekfQ;k ukjkt gks x;s Fks vkSj [kuu ekfQ;k us vius eqU'kh eSuiky ls ,d QthZ f'kdk;r ftykf/kdkjh lgkjuiqj dks dh mlds ckn ;g eqdnek iathd`r djk;k foosfpr }kjk tks bl eqdnek vijk/k la[;k 160@2015 esa Qkbuy fjiksVZ yxk;h ml QkbZuy fjiksVZ dh izfr layXud ua017 gSA" Paragraph 53 of the reply dealt with notice dated 08.09.2015 as follows:- "53- ;g fd [kku vf/kdkjh jktdqekj laxe }kjk izsf"kr uksfVl la01269 fnukad 08-09-2015 esa izkFkhZ dk ;g dFku gS ;g fd ;g uksfVl fnukad 23-10-2015 dks izkIr djk;k x;k gS mlds lEcU/k esa izkFkhZ o lqHkk"k pkS/kjh }kjk fnukad 04-11-2015 dks gh tokc izLrqr dj fn; x;k FkkA bl uksfVl ds lEcU/k esa Li"V fd;k tk jgk gS fd mDr uksfVl izkFkhZ dks >wBk vk/kkjghu Hkstk x;k Fkk tks ekfQ;k o ljdkjh e'khujh dh fefyHkxr ls fn;k x;k Fkk mlh fnu uksfVl fn;k x;k mlh fnu [kku fyfid }kjk ,Q0vkbZ0vkj0 Fkkuk csgV esa ntZ djkuk og Hkh fcuk vf/kd`r vf/kdkjh ds vius vki esa lkfcr djrk gS fd ;g lc dk;Zokgh izkFkhZ dks >wBk Qalkus ds fy, dh xbZ gSA" Here, the petitioner has been denying his indulgence in the activity of illegal mining and what we find from the decision making process and from the record is that rule of fair play has been breached with impunity, inasmuch as, after liberty has been accorded by the Apex Court, the petitioner has proceeded to file a detailed and exhaustive reply wherein each and every facet of the matter was sought to be denied/disputed and most conveniently, it is sought to be mentioned by the District Magistrate that the reply submitted by the petitioner was not satisfactory and in the earlier part of the order while dealing with respective notices, it has been mentioned that petitioner has not proceeded to place sufficient material to rebut the allegation. Decision maker in the present case has ignored the weight of reply available on record as extracted above and has dealt with the same in perfunctory manner with closed mind, whereas while exercising quasi-judicial authority was required to be free from bias i.e. there should be absence of conscious or unconscious prejudice to either of the parties. Here the tenor of proceedings are speaking for itself that District Magistrate while dealing with the matter was proceeding with pre-conceived notion that petitioner in-fact has indulged in illegal mining, whereas the said opinion could have been formed, only after enquiry was held. Once the liability was to be fastened on the shoulder of petitioner, then it was the obligation of the State to prove by way of credible evidence available that it was the petitioner, who has indulged in illegal mining and in the said direction, apart from issuing show cause notice, all the evidence that was sought to be relied upon i.e. the incumbents who have carried out the search and survey and the incumbents who have come forward to depose against petitioner, their names ought to have been disclosed and they ought to have been produced to support the case of State that petitioner in-fact has indulged in illegal mining. Not only this as a part of process, petitioner was entitled to have reasonable opportunity of defending himself by questioning the veracity of evidence produced against him and by adducing his own defence evidence, if any. Decision maker is bound to act fairly, as under the scheme of things provided for, the determination made by him will entail civil consequences, as qua the person charged with illegal mining on charges being proved financial liability would be shouldered and in contra situation, the State would be at loss. Apex Court in the case of Goa Foundation vs. Union of India 2014 (6) SCC 590 while dealing with the report of Shah Commission, constituted for inquiring illegal mining, in reference of report so submitted held that prosecution of mining lessees cannot be directed on the basis of finding in report of Shah Commission, as before submitting said report, incumbents have not been provided with the opportunity of being heard and to produce evidence in their defence and not allowed the right to cross-examine. In the said case, Central Government/State Government gave undertaking that no action would be undertaken on the basis of said finding without undertaking exercise of giving opportunity of hearing. Since in the present case the State/Competent Authority would conduct on enquiry into the allegation of illegal mining it would possess the character of quasi judicial proceeding. Recording of finding as to illegal mining being carried out by a particular incumbent for the purposes of fixing financial responsibility would certainly entail full-fledged enquiry, comprising allegation/evidence in support of charges coming forward followed by his case in defence and then findings arrived at based on evidence adduced. Recovery would follow if the finding returned is adverse to incumbent charged with allegation of illegal mining. Having regard to the character and complexion of proceedings in conjunction with the structure of power conferred by the Act/Rules, the inevitable conclusion is that proceedings in hand necessarily will have to be quasi-judicial proceedings wherein full play is required to be given to the rule of natural justice by the State/Competent Authority. Apex Court in the case of Oryx Fisheries Ltd. vs. U.O.I , 2010 (13) SCC 427, has held that a quasi-judicial authority, while acting in exercise of its statutory power must act fairly and must act with an open mind. The principle that justice must not only be done but it must eminently appear to be done as well is applicable to quasi-judicial proceeding if such proceeding has to inspire confidence in the mind of those who are subject to. Non suiting the defence on the pretext of being not satisfactory has been disapproved, similarly absence of reasons has not been approved of. Apex Court in the case of Hienz Indian (P) Ltd. vs. State of U.P. 2012 (5) SCC 443 has held that power of judicial review is not so much concerned with the decision itself as much with the decision making process. In all such cases judicial examination is confined to finding out whether findings of fact have reasonable basis on evidence and whether such findings are consistent with law of land. In view of this, as far as we are concerned, we are not at all approving the decision making process that has been so undertaken by the State, the same having been passed in most arbitrary fashion with closed mind, without providing reasonable opportunity of hearing to petitioner and for absence of reason, accordingly, the order dated 06.10.2016 passed by District Magistrate, Saharanpur is hereby quashed and set aside. As we have intervened on the issue of decision making process, we proceed to pass an order asking the State/Competent Authority to issue a concrete show cause notice to the petitioner appending therein the entire material to be relied upon and the list of witnesses in support of the same and thereafter after adducing evidence and after providing opportunity of hearing to the petitioner to lead his defence, reasoned decision be taken based on evidence adduced preferably within next three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order. With this, present Writ Petition is allowed. Order Date :-16.12.2016 A. Pandey