Ajay Sethi vs Standard Chartered Bank (Through Md And ... on 6 November, 2023 IN THE COURT OF SH. PAWAN KUMAR, LD. ASJ/SPL/FTC/PHC/NEW DELHI REVISION PETITION NO.416 of 2019 CNR NO. DLND01-012870-2019 IN THE MATTER OF: SH. AJAY SETHI S/O LATE SH. V.K SETHI, R/O FLAT NO. 163-A, DDA FLATS, SATYAM ENCLAVE, JHILMIL, DELHI - 110095 ...... APPELLANT VERSUS STANDARD CHARTERED BANK THE BRANCH MANAGER, 10, PARLIAMENT STREET, NEW DELHI - 110001 .......RESPONDENT Instituted on : 23.07.2019 Reserved on : 20.10.2023 Pronounced on : 06.11.2023 JUDGMENT 1. Vide instant revision petition, revisionist takes exception to the order dated 18.03.2019 passed by Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate, (MM-06), PHC, New Delhi, whereby the complaint registered vide CC Crl Rev No. 416 of 2019 Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank Page No. 1 of 7 no.15354/2017 titled as " Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank " was dismissed. 2. Brief facts may be taken note of : the respondent bank issued a credit card no.4541-9823-3942-7962 with the credit limit of Rs.1 lac to the complainant as a privileged customer. The credit limit of the credit card was enhanced up to Rs.2 lacs. The respondent bank issued two loan facilities of Rs.4,15,000/- and Rs.84,000/- on this credit card in August 2012. The revisionist had paid monthly EMIs as per the schedule but the respondent bank fraudulently took overcharged amount on every EMI. As per the complaint, the respondent bank cheated the revisionist by overcharging the EMI amount fraudulently. The bank official did not supply the hard copy of monthly statements of the EMIs to the revisionist despite repeated requests. The bank officials did not provide the statements of the EMIs against the loan of the accused despite repeated request and visits to the concerned branch. It is further alleged that the respondent bank fraudulently converted the complainant's running loan into a new loan without giving information or notice to the revisionist. As per the complaint, on various occasions, the recovery agent of the bank misbehaved with the revisionist and his wife publicly. The agents abused and threatened the revisionist on many occasions. The revisionist has filed a civil suit against the bank and has also filed one complaint at PS Vivek Vihar. On the basis of the aforesaid allegations, the complaint was filed by the revisionist against the respondent and the same was dismissed by the impugned order. In the Crl Rev No. 416 of 2019 Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank Page No. 2 of 7 pre-summoning evidence, the complainant / revisionist was examined by the Ld. Trial Court as CW-1. The complainant relied upon various documents in the pre-summoning evidence. 3. Vide impugned order, Ld. Trial Court dismissed the complaint and for the sake of convenience, the relevant portion of the impugned order passed by Ld. Trial Court is reproduced as under:- "In the present matter, to prove his case, the complaint was firstly required to show that a loan agreement was executed and that he made payments to the accused strictly in terms of the loan agreement. The complainant has relied upon a copy of loan agreement and Internet generated credit card statement. The copy of loan agreement has not been proved as per the provisions of Indian Evidence Act and also the credit card statement the devoid of the mandatory certificate, required to be filed as per Section 65B of Indian Evidence Act. Thus, the credit card statement and the copy of loan agreement are inadmissible in evidence and can not be relied upon, therefore, in the absence of proving either the loan agreement or the payments made by him, the complainant can not be permitted to take the stand that he had made the payments strictly in terms of loan agreement. As the same could not be proved, the allegations of offence punishable u/s 406/120B/420/465/466/468/471 IPC remain unproved. Further, in so far as the other averments regarding the offence punishable u/s 506 IPC is considered, the evidence on record to prove the same is vague as neither the name of the alleged offender, nor the time, nor the date has been testified by the witness. Even the eye witness / victim i.e. the wife of the complainant has not been produced to substantiate the said allegations. Thus, these allegations also remain unproved. Further, in so far as, the allegations u/s 499 IPC are considered, no specific deposition has been made by the complainant qua the ingredient or commission of the said offence. Hence, the said offence also remains unproved. In light of the aforesaid reasons and discussions, in the opinion of this court, no ground for summoning the accused is made out in the present case." Crl Rev No. 416 of 2019 Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank Page No. 3 of 7 4. The revisionist is aggrieved with the impugned order and have assailed the same on the various grounds which can be summarized as under:- (i) That the impugned order passed by Ld Trial Court is bad, illegal, erroneous and against the established principle of law; (ii) That Ld Trial Court passed the impugned order without application of judicial mind in mechanical manner; (iii) That Ld Trial Court failed to appreciate the facts of the complainant and decided the case without merits. 5. I have heard the arguments advanced by Ld. Counsel for the complainant. None appeared on behalf of the respondent to argue in this case. I have carefully perused the material on record. 6. Before proceeding further, it would apt to recall the note of caution that was voiced by the Apex Court in "M/s. Pepsi Foods vs. Special Ltd. vs. Special Judicial Magistrate, AIR 1998 SC 128". The Apex Court held that summoning of an accused in a Criminal case is a serious matter. The relevant observations at para 26 of the judgment is reproduced hereunder:- "Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of course. It is not that the complainant has to bring only two witnesses to support his allegations in the complaint to have the criminal law set into motion. The order of the Magistrate summoning the accused must reflect that he has applied his mind to the facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. He has to examine the nature of Crl Rev No. 416 of 2019 Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank Page No. 4 of 7 allegations made in the complaint and the evidence both oral and documentary in support thereof and that would be sufficient for the complainant to succeed in bringing charge home to the accused. It is not that the Magistrate is a silent spectator at the time of recording of preliminary evidence before summoning of the accused. Magistrate has to carefully scrutinize the evidence brought on record and may even himself put questions to the complainant and his witnesses to elicit answers to find out the truthfulness of the allegations or otherwise and then examine if any offence is prima facie committed by all or any of the accused". 7. After going through the records of present case, I am of the view that the dispute is purely civil in nature to which a criminal color is sought to be given. The dispute at best appears to be grievance of a customer of the respondent bank regarding non supply of statement of account and overcharging. In my view, even if all the allegations of revisionist are taken true on its face value, then also no offence is disclosed in the instant case. The present case is purely civil in nature and it seems that present complaint has been filed by complainant as a pressure tactics. There is nothing on record to suggest that respondents were having any intention to cheat the complainant since beginning. It is admitted that the bank issued loan facility on the credit card of the revisionist / complainant. The revisionist had certain grievance regarding overcharging on the EMIs. Further, the grievance of the revisionist is that the bank fraudulently converted complainant's running loan into a new loan. The remedy for the revisionist is to approach the consumer forum instead of filing a criminal complaint. In Hridya Ranjan Prasad Verma Vs. State of Bihar (2000) 4 SCC 168, in para 15 it was observed as under :- Crl Rev No. 416 of 2019 Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank Page No. 5 of 7 "15. In determining the question it has to be kept in kind that the distinction between mere breach of contract and the offence of cheating is a fine one. It depends upon the intention of the accused at the time of inducement which may be judged by his subsequent conduct but for this subsequent conduct is not the sole test. Mere breach of contract cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is shown right at the beginning of the transaction, that is the time when the offence is said to have been committed..................." 8. Illumined by the case law referred to herein above, this Court has adverted to the entire record of the case. 9. In nutshell, the case of the revisionist / complainant is that the respondent bank had advanced two loans on the credit card issued in the name of the revisionist. It is alleged that the respondent bank did not issue the statements of the EMI despite repeated request and the bank had overcharged on the EMIs paid by the revisionists. The further grievance of the revisionist is that the bank had changed loans into a new loan without his consent and information. There are allegations of criminal intimidation and threat by the collection agent of the bank. 10. The Ld. Trial Court based the impugned order on the reasoning that the copy of the loan agreement and the credit card statements is not admissible in the absence of certificate u/s 65B of the Indian Evidence Act. The reasoning given by the Ld. Trial Court for the dismissal of the complaint for offences under section 406 / 120B / 420 / 465 / 466 / 468 / 471 IPC does not appears to be as per law. Crl Rev No. 416 of 2019 Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank Page No. 6 of 7 The documents as above can be summoned from the bank u/s 91 Cr.P.C during the trial. Although the trial court order is not based on the sound reasons, yet the case of the revisionist, even if, taken as true on the face value, does not disclose any criminal offence. The entire case of the revisionist pertains to the grievance that the respondent bank did not provide the hard copy of the monthly statements of the EMIs and overcharged the same without knowledge of the revisionist. On careful reading of the complaint as a whole and the statement of the complainant in pre-summoning evidence, it is clear that it was a civil dispute between the revisionist and the respondent and the remedy lies with the civil court or the consumer forum. 11. The allegations of criminal intimidation and threat are very general and vague in nature. There is no material on record to summon the respondent as no criminal case is made out. With these observations, present revision petition stands dismissed. 12. Revision file be consigned to Record Room after due compliance. Announced in Open Court On 6th November, 2023 (Pawan Kumar) ASJ /Spl. FTC / PHC / NDD New Delhi / 06.11.2023 Crl Rev No. 416 of 2019 Ajay Sethi v. Standard Chartered Bank Page No. 7 of 7