Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/S. ... vs . Manish Goel & Another Page No. 1/26 on 7 January, 2023 IN THE COURT OF SHRI YASHDEEP CHAHAL Metropolitan Magistrate­01 : New Delhi District Patiala House Courts : New Delhi. New No.44310/2016 Unique ID No. DLND02­000689­2011 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited, Through Its Authorized Representative Shri Akashjyoti Baruah ..................Complainant Versus 1. Manish Goel, S/o Shri R.K. Goel, 19/5, 3rd Floor, Shakti Nagar, Delhi­110007. 2. Shri Yatish Kumar Goel, Editor Breaking News Today 19/5, 3rd Floor, Shakti Nagar, Delhi­110007. ..............Accused Offence complained of : 499/500/501/34 IPC Plea of the Accused : Accused pleaded not guilty Date of filing : 12.09.2008. Date of institution of the Case : 28.04.2009. Date on which arguments heard : 28.11.2022. Date of decision : 07.01.2023. Final Order : Acquitted. Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 1/26 BRIEF FACTS AND REASONS FOR THE DECISION OF THE CASE 1. In brief, the complainant company is engaged in the business of real estate development & colonization and is a reputed company in its field. The complainant has filed the present complaint case against accused Manish Goel and Yatish Kumar Goel, under Section 499 , 500 & 501 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 on account of gross, malicious and deliberate defamation in a false, unjustifiable and scandalous manner, thereby harming the reputation of the complainant company. 2. The case of the complainant is that accused No. 1 is the Senior Editor and accused No. 2 is an Editor of the Newspaper 'Breaking News Today'. In the year 2005, the complainant offered housing scheme 'Florence Marvel' at Sushant Lok­II/III, Gurgaon, Haryana and one Atul Bansal vide application dated 08.05.2005 applied for a residential house in the same. The complainant accepted the said offer and vide agreement dated 10.05.2005, a provisional unit B­254­I at Sushant Lok­III, Florence Marvel was allotted to him subject to terms and conditions mentioned therein. Subsequently, Atul Bansal vide application dated Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 2/26 28.01.2008, requested to purchase the said unit in the name of Manish Goel which was accepted subject to acceptance of terms and conditions of the prevailing agreement by him and rights were transferred in the name of accused No. 1. Thereafter, complainant completed construction work in accordance with highest standards and fittings and vide letter dated 22.02.2008 requested the accused No. 1 to take its possession and to settle the account. Pursuant thereto accused No. 2, being AR of accused No. 1, took actual physical possession of the aforesaid Unit on 20.03.2008 after verifying all the fittings and fixtures to his full satisfaction. Thereafter, accused No. 2 sent a letter dated 28.05.2008 levelling allegations of cheating, fraud and deficiencies on the complainant with respect to the aforesaid Unit. As per the allegations, the said letter was kept in the cabin of Mr. K.K. Tripathi, VAP (S&M) at the table and the same was read over by the business associates/clients of the complainant company, namely, Mr. Vijendra Verma and Mr. Sanjay Kapoor and it came to be known in the business circle. Subsequently, as per the allegations, the accused persons also published a defamatory article against the complainant company on 26th May­10th June, 2008 in their newspaper 'The Breaking News'. The press release and letter dated 25.08.2008 contained very serious and utterly false allegations against Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 3/26 the complainant company, as alleged. It is the case of the complainant that the press release was made public and many media persons and public got access to the same as a result of which it suffered great humiliation apart from jolt to its respect and fame. Since, both the accused persons in furtherance of their common intention have acted in most mala fide and unclean manner and willfully, intentionally and deliberately injured/harmed the dignity, honour and reputation of complainant company and tarnished its image in the eyes of public at large, the complainant submits that they are liable to be prosecuted under Section 500 / 34 of IPC jointly and severally for the offence of defamation. 3. Per contra, the plea of both the accused persons is that no such letter, as alleged, was ever written to the complainant company, and the same has not been placed on record by the complainant company as it was manipulated and was never in existence at any point of time. Further, no newspaper article in 'Breaking News Today' containing the defamatory content was ever published by them about the complainant company. The photocopy of the newspaper placed on record by the complainant company is a manipulated one. It is further submitted that Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 4/26 the accused persons have filed various cases against complainant company and in order to pressurize them to withdraw those cases, the complainant company has filed the instant complaint case. Rather, the complainant company has cheated their family to the tune of Crores of Rupees and constructed illegal swimming pools without the approval of District Town Planner, Gurugram, Haryana and it does not have any appropriate sanctioned plan. National Green Tribunal in O.A. No. 378/16 has finally adjudicated this issue and vide its order dated 25.03.2019 has held that the complainant company has not only constructed illegal swimming pools in the bungalow but also has eaten up the green area which proves its illegal acts and deeds. Further, the National Green Tribunal has also imposed a fine of Rs.15 Crores and further damages to the environment is being assessed. 4. Accordingly, a notice under Section 251 of Cr.PC was served upon both the accused persons to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 5. Thereafter, the complainant examined its AR Shri Akashjyoti Baruah to prove its case. He has deposed on oath that complainant company is known for its honest dealings and is considered Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 5/26 trust worthy by the Industry. He further deposed that accused No. 1 is the Senior Editor and accused No. 2 is the Editor in the newspaper 'Breaking News Today'. He further deposed that in the year 2005, complainant company had sought to develop new township/housing project in the name of 'Florence Marvel' Scheme at Sushant Lok­II/III, Gurgaon, Haryana in which Mr. Atul Bansal applied for a residential unit vide application dated 08.05.2005. The said offer was accepted and an agreement dated 10.05.2005 was executed in favour of Mr. Atul Bansal whereby Unit B­254 was provisionally allotted to him subject to certain terms and conditions mentioned therein and Shri Atul Bansal agreed/consented to all the terms and conditions. However, later he moved an application dated 28.01.2008 for change of rights for purchase of Unit in the name of Manish Goel which was accepted and accused No. 1 was bound down with the same. He further deposed that complainant company completed construction of the said unit in accordance with the highest standards and fittings and issued a letter dated 04.02.2008 to accused No. 1 stating therein that the house unit is ready for physical possession and made request to the accused No. 1 to settle the account and collect the possession letter for taking its physical possession. He further deposed that in accordance with the allotment Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 6/26 agreement the house unit allotted to accused No. 1 was complete to the best in confirmation with the highest standard and according to the agreement requested the accused to take possession of the house vide letter dated 22.02.2008. Accordingly, the accused No. 2, on behalf of accused No. 1, took physical possession of the house unit bearing No. B­ 254, Sushant Lok­III, Florence Marvel on 02.03.2008. He further deposed that while taking physical possession of the house unit, the accused No. 2 specifically verified the fittings and fixtures and on being satisfied gave in writing that he has no adverse remarks to the possession letter dated 20.03.2008. However, in active connivance with each other and with ulterior and mala fide motive to harm the reputation of the complainant company, both the accused persons sent a letter dated 28.05.2008 by making false allegations of cheating and fraud against the complainant and further falsely stated that there are some deficiencies in the house unit which do not find a place in the agreement dated 10.05.2005. He further deposed that the said letter was kept in the cabin of Mr. K.K. Tripathi, VAP (S&M) at the table and same was readover by Mr. Vijender Verma and Mr. Sanjay Kapoor, who are business associates/clients of the complainant company, which made a bad impact on them. Further, the said letter came to known in the business circle Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 7/26 from the said persons. He further deposed that the said letter was sent by the accused persons with an intention to harm the reputation of the complainant company. He further deposed that the accused persons kept on threatening the complainant to bow down to their demands for giving them extra space and some new fittings which were outside the purview of agreement between the parties. He further deposed that the accused persons also published a defamatory article in the newspaper 'The Breaking News' in issue dated 26th May­10th June, 2008 making very serious and utterly false allegations which do not contain even an iota of truth and by publishing the said press release the accused persons have made imputations against the complainant company. He further deposed that the said press release was made public and many a media person and public got access to the same. He further deposed that accused persons have willfully and scandalously attacked and harmed the reputation of the complainant company in the public at large. He further deposed that complainant company has received an authorization letter from accused No. 1 Manish Goel in favour of accused No. 2 Yatish Kumar Goel to co­ ordinate and deal on his behalf with M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited regarding possession and final finish of the house unit. He further deposed that this fact further establishes that defamatory letters were Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 8/26 issued by accused No. 2 Yatish Kumar Goel in furtherance of common intention of accused No. 1 and hence, they both are jointly and severally liable for the same. 6. During his cross­examination CW­1 Akashjyoti Baruah deposed that he used to look after the work of Sales and Marketing in the complainant company since 14.10.2006. He further deposed that Mr. Vijendra Verma and Sanjay Kapoor are the associate­cum­channel partner of the complainant company and promote sale and sell projects/properties etc. developed by the complainant company. He further deposed that both these persons mainly look after the projects developed in Gurgaon, Amritsar, Jhansi, Gwalior etc. He further deposed that M/s. Rigoss Estates Network Pvt. Ltd. is a sister concern of M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited and looks after the operations and facility management services of the projects developed by Ansal Buildwell Limited. During his cross­examination he affirmed that sometimes projects are sold on tentative basis and this fact is mentioned in the agreement. He denied the suggestion that the terms of Ex. CW­1/B are wrong. He further deposed that the complainant company has permission from the concerned authority to construct a swimming pool in Bunglow Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 9/26 No. B­254­I, Florence Marvel, Sushant Lok, Sector­57, after verifying from the records. He further deposed that as per records a water body had been approved by the Competent Authority in Bungalow No. B­254­ I, Florence Marvel, Sushant Lok­III, Sector­57, Gurugram, Haryana in terms of clause No. 11 of the builder­buyer agreement Ex. CW­1/B under the head specifications mentioned that are indicative, only some of them can be changed or equivalent used in consultation with Architect at the discretion of the Builder, swimming pool has been mentioned on the terrace which is also a water body. He further deposed that he never visited the unit B­254­I but visited other Florence Marvel Villas in the same project. He further deposed that as per documents there is no deficiency in the said unit, but he did not visit the spot. He further deposed that he has knowledge that the accused have filed one matter in MRTP Commission, one in State Consumer Forum and one in National Green Tribunal, New Delhi and he has filed reply thereof on behalf of complainant company. He denied the suggestion that the complainant has filed the instant case with sole object and purpose to pressurize the accused and not to avail the legal remedy in accordance with law. He further deposed that letter dated 28.05.2008 Ex. CW­1/F was read by Vijender Verma and Sanjay Kapoor in the cabin of Mr. K.K. Tripathi by Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 10/26 picking it up of their own. He further deposed that he cannot tell the source of water supply in the said project and the same can be verified from the concerned person in the complainant company. He denied the suggestion that Ex. CW­1/G is fabricated or complainant has got it printed. He further deposed that no licence of this project has been cancelled by the competent authority as per record of complainant company. 7. Complainant has also examined CW Shri Sanjay Kapur, S/o Shri D.B. Kapur, R/o B­416, Nirman Vihar, Delhi­110092 deposed on oath that he is business associate of complainant company for the last 20­22 years. He further deposed that he has read out the letter in question in the year 2008 wherein there were some allegations against Mr. Gopal Ansal which were wrong as per his knowledge. He has further deposed that in the said letter there was allegation that some electric wires were going through the park in which there is water but to his knowledge there is no such thing as he is acquaintance with the area very well. He further deposed that to his understanding the letter on behalf of 'Breaking News Today' is a defamatory letter. He further deposed that he does not know as to who signed the said letter but it might have been signed by some Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 11/26 lawyer. He further deposed that he felt very bad after reading the said letter as he knew Mr. Gopal Ansal for a very long time and he has not heard any such thing about him and the complainant company. 8. CW Vijendra Verma, Proprietor of M/s. Vijeta Estates, S/o Late Shri S.K. Verma, R/o G­5, Ground Floor, Ansal Bhawan, K.G. Marg, New Delhi has deposed on oath that he is business associate of the complainant company and dealing with since various years. He has deposed that in the last week of May, 2008 he along with Sanjay Kapoor was sitting in the cabin of Mr. K.K. Tripathi, Additional V.P. (Sales & Marketing) of the complainant company where they saw a letter dated 28.05.2008 on the letter head of 'Breaking News Today', addressed to Shri Gopal Ansal and other Senior Officers of the complainant company which they read out due to curiosity and found that it contained certain allegations against the complainant company; that the complainant had deceived their senior editor Shri Manish Goel and in spite of taking crores of money, sold house situated at B­254, Sushant Lok­III, Gurgaon with sub­standard materials. He further deposed that the said remarks against the complainant were defamatory one and against its dignity and made bad impact on the business associates. He further deposed that Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 12/26 after reading the above said letter, the credibility and reputation of the complainant company has fallen down in his opinion which also effected the market business of the complainant company. He further deposed that the said letter was sent by Shri Yatish Kumar Goel, Editor of 'Breaking News Today' on behalf and behest of Mr. Manish Goel. 9. On the other hand, in their defence, both the accused persons have examined DW­1 Shri Sanjeev Kumar Kaushal, Senior Assistant, State Consumer Commission who produced record of complaint bearing No. C­13/32, titled as Manish Goel Vs. M/s. Ansal Buildwell wherein the next date was 29.07.2020, a copy of which was exhibited as Ex. DW­1/1, the copy of reply of respondent Nos. 1 & 2 was exhibited as Ex. DW­1/2. The copy of complaint bearing No. 162/2008 was exhibited as Ex. DW­1/3 and copy of order dated 10.12.2012 was exhibited as Ex. DW­1/4. He further affirmed that all the said exhibits are true and correct as per record. He further produced copy of the order dated 11.07.2017 passed by the Hon'ble State Commission in Complaint No. C­13/32 which was exhibited as Ex. DW­1/5. 10. Thereafter, statement of both the accused persons were recorded under Section 313 of Cr.PC wherein they denied having written Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 13/26 any such letter to the Complainant company. Rather, they submitted that complainant company has cheated them to the tune of Crores of rupees and has constructed illegal swimming pools without the approval of District Town Planner, Gurugram, Haryana and it does not have the appropriate sanctioned plan. They further stated that they have filed cases against it and complainant has filed the instant complaint case in order to pressurize them to withdraw those cases. They further stated that the National Green Tribunal in O.A. No. 378/16 has finally adjudicated and vide order dated 25.03.2019 has held that the complainant company has not only constructed illegal swimming pools in the bungalow but also has eaten up the green area which proves the illegal acts and deeds of the complainant company and the real motive behind filing the present complaint case against them. Moreover, the National Green Tribunal has imposed a fine of Rs.15 Crores and further damages to the environment is being assessed. They further denied having published any such newspaper containing any defamatory article about the complainant company and submitted that that is why the complainant company has not placed on record the original newspaper. They further stated that the photocopy of newspaper placed on record is a manipulated one and that is why the same could not be proved on record in accordance with law. Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 14/26 11. During arguments, Ld. Counsel for the complainant has drawn attention of the Court towards Section 499 which clearly states that whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person. 12. Ld. Counsel for complainant has urged that in view of the ingredients of defamation, if the imputation is made in good faith is not defamation. However, in the instant case, the imputations made are full of criticism and to solely defame M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited, its director Mr. Gopal Ansal, including reputation of its officials without having sufficient evidence to prove the allegations. He has further argued that exceptions of defamation are not met since the material published was not in good faith nor it was an opinion touching the public importance. In the present case, the imputation inflected on the reputation of M/s. Ansal Buildwell, its director Mr. Gopal Ansal as well as its employees was to harm them directly or indirectly by publishing an article which has lowered down their moral or intellectual character as Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 15/26 well as credit. Hence, the same is nothing but a disgraceful attack and meets all the ingredients of Section 499 of IPC and the accused persons have failed to rebut the same. 13. On the contrary, Ld. Defense Counsel has argued that that complainant company has cheated both the accused persons to the tune of Crores of rupees and has constructed illegal swimming pools without the approval of District Town Planner at Gurugram, Haryana and it does not have the appropriate sanctioned plan. He has further argued that the accused persons have filed cases against the complainant company, and the complainant has filed the present complaint case just to pressurize them to withdraw those cases. He has further argued that Hon'ble National Green Tribunal in O.A. No. 378/16 has finally adjudicated this issue vide order dated 25.03.2019 wherein it has held that the complainant company has not only constructed illegal swimming pools in the bungalow but has also eaten up the green area. He has further urged that the same proves the illegal acts and deeds of the complainant company and the real motive behind filing the present complaint case against the accused persons, and that is why the Hon'ble National Green Tribunal has imposed a fine of Rs.15 Crores.He has further urged that Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 16/26 the accused persons have not published any such newspaper containing any defamatory article about the complainant company and that is why the complainant company has not placed on record the original newspaper. He has further argued that the photocopy of newspaper placed on record is a manipulated one, therefore, the same could not be proved on record in accordance with law. 14. Lastly, it has been urged that no material question/suggestion was put to the defense witness during his cross­ examination. It has also been argued that no suggestion was given to DW­1 with respect to the order dated 25.03.2019 passed by the Hon'ble National Green Tribunal in O.A. No. 378/16 wherein it has finally adjudicated the issue holding that the complainant company has not only constructed illegal swimming pools in the bungalow but also has eaten up the green area which proves the illegal acts and deeds of the complainant company and the real motive behind filing the present complaint case against them. 15. To rebut the contentions of the accused persons, the complainant has submitted that the consumer case filed by the accused persons has already been dismissed due to want of prosecution and this Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 17/26 shows that they had no genuine case against the complainant. 16. Before appreciation of evidence, I consider it relevant to reproduce the provisions constituting the ingredients of the offence of defamation:­ Section 499 in The Indian Penal Code :­ 499. Defamation.--Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1.--It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.--It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.-- An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.--No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. Section 501 in The Indian Penal Code :­ 501. Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory.-- Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 18/26 17. In the case in hand, the allegation of the complainant is that accused persons have written a defamatory letter dated 28.05.2008 to the complainant company which was kept in the Cabin of Mr. K.K. Tripaty, VAP (S&M) at the table and the same was readover by Mr. Vijender Verma, S/o Shri S.K. Verma and Mr. Sanjay Kapoor, S/o Shri D.B. Kapoor, who are the business associates/channel partner of the complainant company and the said defamatory letter came to the notice of business circle through them which caused harm to the dignity and reputation of the complainant company. Further, the accused persons have made publication in the newspaper 'The Breaking News' in issue for 26th May­10th June, 2008 wherein false and defamatory allegations have been levelled against the complainant. 18. On the other hand, the defense of both the accused persons is that they have not written any such defamatory letter dated 28.05.2008 or that they have never published any article containing defamatory article in the newspaper 'Breaking News Today' against the complainant company. To establish defamation, the complainant has to prove that both the accused persons in furtherance of their common intention with each other intended to harm, knowingly or having reason to believe that Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 19/26 such imputation will harm, the reputation of the complainant, subject to just exceptions. 19. In order to prove its case, the complainant has placed on record two documents - the letter dated 28.05.2008 and the offending newspaper article published in Breaking Today. I deem it proper to consider the documents one by one. Both the documents have been filed as photocopies. 20. In order to prove the offence of defamation, the following ingredients are mandatory - (i) The statement must be defamatory in nature so as to injure the reputation of the complainant; (ii) The statement must be published or circulated thereby indicating that the reputation was harmed in front of the members of the society; (iii) The intent behind the statement must be to defame the person; (iv) The statement was not made in good faith or for public interest or under other just exceptions. 21. The statements made in the two documents are no doubt of a nature that they may harm the reputation of the complainant. However, Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 20/26 merely defamatory statement is not enough for proving defamation. It is mandatory to establish the connection between the accused persons and the statement being put as a defamatory statement. It is also mandatory to prove the statement in accordance with the law of evidence. The letter in question bears the endorsement "Urgent & Confidential" and is addressed to the officials of the complainant for redressal of certain grievances. It is not meant for public consumption or circulation and therefore, it cannot be said that the intention of the accused persons was to lower the reputation of the complainant in the eyes of the public at large. A careful perusal of record also shows that there are discrepancies in the evidence led by the complainant which have come forth during the course of its witnesses. CW­1 has deposed on oath that both the accused persons wrote the said letter and also published the article in the newspaper. On the contrary, in his cross­examination, CW­1 has deposed that the letter dated 28.05.2008 Ex. CW­1/F was read by Vijender Verma and Sanjay Kapoor in the cabin of Mr. K.K. Tripathi by picking it up of their own. Therefore, the letter in question was never meant for the consumption of the business associates of the complainant. Furthermore, the authorship of the letter has also not been proved. In the cross examination, he further deposed that he did not know as to who Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 21/26 signed the said letter but it might have been signed by some lawyer. Thus, testimony of CW Sanjay Kapoor seems to be untrustworthy. Though, the other witness, namely, Vijendra Verma, of the complainant has not been cross­examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused persons, but a careful reading of the testimony of this witness shows that they both saw the letter dated 28.05.2008 in the cabin of Mr. K.K. Tripathi while sitting there and due to curiosity they read over the same. Even for the sake of presumption, it is believed that both the accused persons have written defamatory letter causing harm to the reputation of complainant company, the same must not be kept on the table in open condition which might be accessed by any person, irrespective of the fact whether the said person is the business associate, channel partner, employee of the complainant company or a person from general public. It is unbelievable that a company which is renowned in the business world will act in acute negligent manner by keeping any defamatory letter on the table in easily accessible condition wherein defamatory allegations have been raised against it. The said letter falls short of a documentary proof and cannot be relied upon at all. 22. The second defamatory statement is alleged to be stated in Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 22/26 the newspaper article. At the very threshold, it may be noted that both the letter and the news article are photocopies which were exhibited in the pre­summoning evidence of the complainant. I consider it a fit case to discuss the admissibility of photocopies in evidence. As per the law of evidence, the rule of "best evidence" forms the fundamental basis in a court of law. The best evidence is usually the original of a document itself, or the primary evidence. In certain specified circumstances, secondary evidence of a document may be admitted, however, the same cannot be done without fulfilling the requisite requirements stated in Section 63 read with 65 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 . In this case, no explanation has been furnished to explain as to why the original documents could not be produced. This raises grave doubts on the veracity of the complainant's case, particularly because the letter in question was admittedly received by the complainant in its office. In the absence of proper explanation in terms of Section 65 of the Evidence Act, photocopies cannot be permitted in evidence. These documents, even if relevant, are not admissible in law. It is settled law that relevancy and admissibility of evidence are two distinct concepts. Whereas relevancy would be determined in light of the facts in issue or relevant facts, admissibility is guided by the mode of proof. The photopcopy Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 23/26 documents have been objected to by the accused persons in their Section 313 Cr.PC statements and also in the cross examination. In Narbada Devi Gupta v. Birendra Kumar Jaiswal and Another (2003) 8 SCC 745, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that mere marking of a document as an exhibit is not enough in a case. The execution of the said documents is also required to be proved through admissible evidence. Crucially, it may be noted that exhibition of a document is an exercise undertaken for the purpose of identifying the document, and mere exhibition is not conclusive of the contents of the document. It cannot be presumed that any defamatory article was ever published by the accused persons making defamatory remarks against the complainant company. To prove its case, the complainant must have placed it on record to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. In the absence of said alleged defamatory publication, though photocopy has been placed on record, it cannot be ascertained that any publication was made by the accused persons in furtherance of their common intention with each other to defame or harm the reputation of the complainant company. Hence, in the absence of cogent evidence accused persons cannot be held liable for the alleged offence. Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 24/26 23. In the light of aforesaid observations, it is clear that case of complainant is doubtful due to absence of documentary proof as well as for want of satisfaction of ingredients of Section 499 / 501 of the IPC proving that the accused persons have caused any defamation. 24. In light of aforesaid discussion, this Court is of the view that the complainant has failed to dislodge the presumption in favour of the accused persons, owing to lack of leading trustworthy evidence and due to the absence of documentary proof. It was incumbent upon the complainant to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and the complainant cannot take advantage of the weakness of the defence put by the accused persons. Moreover, the complainant has failed to examine any other witness to prove the fact that the said defamatory letter as well as publication in the newspaper 'The Breaking News' came to the notice of business associates/channel partners or business circle or in the notice of public at large. The only business associates who testified opened the letter in front of the officials of the company and otherwise, it could not have been seen by them. Hence, it is clear that the benefit of doubt has to accrue to the accused persons. Accordingly, both the accused persons are acquitted of the offence under Section 499 / 500 / 501 / 34 of IPC. Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 25/26 25. The accused persons are directed to furnish fresh surety bonds under Section 437A Cr.PC amounting to Rs.10,000/­ each along with one surety each in like amount. 26. Put up for furnishing of surety bonds on 19.01.2023. YASHDEEP Digitally signed by YASHDEEP CHAHAL CHAHAL Date: 2023.01.19 14:41:18 +0530 Dictated directly into the computer (YASHDEEP CHAHAL) and announced in the open Court, M.M.­01 : New Delhi District On 7th January, 2023. Patiala House Courts : New Delhi. Complaint Case No.44310/2016 M/s. Ansal Buildwell Limited Vs. Manish Goel & Another Page No. 26/26