Mrs. Julia Wilson vs Mr. Suresh Goyal on 9 November, 2016 Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 IN THE COURT OF SH. PULASTYA PRAMACHALA ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE SHAHDARA DISTRICT, KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI Criminal Appeal No. : 1172/2016 Under Section : 500 IPC Police Station : Anand Vihar CC No. : 39/2010 Unique I.D. No. : 434052016 In the matter of :- Mrs. JULIA WILSON W/o. Sh. Vinod Wilson, R/o. 29E/F, Flat No.2, 4th Floor, Lakshadweep Apartments, Ward No.1, Mehroli, New Delhi-110030. .................APPELLANT VERSUS Mr. SURESH GOYAL S/o. Sh. J.P. Goyal, R/o. M-2, Akash Bharti Apartments, I.P. Extension, Delhi-110092. ..............RESPONDENT Date of Institution : 03.06.2016 Date of receiving the case in this court : 04.06.2016 Date of reserving order : 26.10.2016 Date of pronouncement : 09.11.2016 Decision : Appeal is allowed. JUDGMENT 1. This is an appeal preferred against the judgment of conviction dated 30.03.2016 and order on sentence dated 05.05.2016, passed by trial court in a case titled as Suresh Goyal v. Julia Wilson, bearing CC No. 39/2010, under Section 500 IPC. Vide impugned judgment dated 30.03.2016, the trial court convicted appellant herein for offence punishable under Section 500 IPC. Vide impugned order on sentence dated 05.05.2016, the trial court sentenced rigorous imprisonment of 6 months to convict (appellant herein). Page 1 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 2. Briefly stated, the relevant facts giving rise to this appeal are that appellant herein was being prosecuted in a case bearing CC No.6877/07 for offence under Section 138 NI Act by the respondent herein. In that case, during her examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C appellant made certain statement, which were found to be slanderous. Appellant was thereafter again prosecuted by respondent for offence under Section 500 IPC, on the basis of those slanderous statement made by her and alleged that appellant had committed offence of defamation as defined in Section 499 IPC and punishable under Section 500 IPC. Trial court held appellant guilty for defamation and hence, the present appeal. 3. Being aggrieved of the impugned judgment of conviction and order on sentence, appellant has preferred this appeal on the following grounds :- ● That the trial court did not appreciate that the appellant is a lady and a retired Govt. Servant Head Nurse with absolute impeccable track record and character. Hence, she is not presumed to have made any false alleged defamatory imputation against a stranger. ● That the trial court erred in not appreciating the fact that the appellant/ convict is a lay person, who made the alleged defamatory imputation in reply to the query/question of the ld. Judge while recording her statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C and not voluntary made any such statement at any stage of the proceeding under Section 138 of N.I Act in the court of Ms. Shivali Sharma, ld. MM. ● The trial court failed to appreciate that if the appellant/convict wanted to defame the complainant, she would have done it in front of the relatives, friends, neighbors etc. of the complainant and not in the closed court room, especially when she made the alleged imputation against the complainant in reply to the question of the hon'ble judge. ● That the trial court failed to appreciate the exception 8 & 9 of 499 IPC Page 2 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 in which the present case of the appellant is squarely covered. That the trial court totally ignored the arguments and citations shown by the counsel of the appellant. ● That the trial court failed to appreciate that the appellant was firstly victimized by the complainant and then feeling emboldened as she pardoned him, filed a false case of the defamation against the appellant. ● That the trial court simply brushed aside the testimonies of the DWs and totally relied upon the testimonies of the CW's without noticing the fact that the CW-2's presence in the court on 24.10.2009 was also doubtful as no other independent witness was called by the complainant in his support though their names were mentioned in the evidence. ARGUMENTS :- 4. Ld. counsel for appellant made submissions as under :- Appellant is a retired Assistant Nurse from AIIMS, while respondent is a money lender and property dealer. The alleged imputations were not defamatory because it lacked mens rea. Such imputations were made without any intention to tarnish the reputation or to defame the respondent. The appellant had given her answer to the question of the court as per her stand, in order to save her interest in that case. Appellant did not know that the witness examined by respondent i.e. Sh. J.P. Gupta was friend of respondent nor was she aware of his presence in the court. Therefore, there could not be any intention to defame respondent in presence of his friend. Appellant had simply narrated her ordeal and while doing so she had also put her reputation on stake. Therefore, it is not proved beyond reasonable doubts that appellant was having mens rea to defame the respondent, while making her statement under Section 313 Page 3 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 Cr.P.C and thus, appellant is at least entitled to protection of exception 9 to Section 499 IPC. Ld. counsel though also referred to exception 1 and 8 to Section 499 IPC, but settled for invoking exception 9 with all force. 5. Ld. counsel for appellant relied upon the following case laws to support his plea that malice is required to invoke criminal liability and to support his plea that the imputed defamatory statement should be treated to be made in good faith and to protect her interest by the appellant and therefore, the appellant should be given benefit of exception to Section 499 IPC :- ● Standard Chartered Bank v. Vinay Kumar Sood & Ors. , 2010 Crl. L.J. 1277(DHC); ● Mangana Nand v. State of U.P. & Anr. , 2001 Crl. Revn. No. 800 (Uttaranchal High Court); ● Bhagat Singh Sethi & ors v. Zinda Lal , 1966 Cri. L.J. 909; ● Alli Rani Joseph Mathew v. P. Arun Kumar , 2012 Crl. O.P. No. 10481 dt. 03.08.2012 (Madras High Court); ● Harbhajan Singh v. State of Punjab , 1966 AIR 97 (Supreme Court of India); ● Romesh Roy v. The King, AIR 1952 Cal 228 (Calcutta High Court); ● Subramanian Swamy v. Union of India, Ministry of Law and others , AIR 2016 Supreme Court 2728. 6. Per contra, ld. counsel for respondent argued that mens rea is to be gathered from the facts and circumstances of a case. In the present case, there was no query from the court as to what had happened with appellant and appellant had made imputations against respondent voluntarily, which had no relation with merits or facts of that case. FINDINGS :- 7. In order to appreciate the rival contentions, evidence on record and law in question, it would be appropriate to refer to the alleged imputations. The slanderous statement made by appellant during her examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C were as under :- Page 4 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 "Once I had gone to the complainant (referring to respondent herein) in his office, he tried to abuse me sexually. When I refused the complainant started saying sorry to me. Thereafter, I never went to his office to pay interest." 8. The aforesaid statement was made by appellant in response to the question put by court, which was as under :- "It has come (in) evidence against you that you took a friendly loan from the complainant and in discharge of legal liability towards the said friendly loan you issued 10 cheques bearing no.314157 to 314166 before the court of Sh. Amit Kumar, ld. MM, Delhi, as previous matter was amicably settled between you and the complainant. What do you have to say?" 9. In response to aforesaid question, appellant took plea that she had never taken friendly loan from the respondent. She had seen an advertisement of respondent and thereafter, she had approached him for a loan of Rs.15,000/- which was disbursed to her. At the time of sanction of the loan, respondent made to sign some documents in blank and also took 2 to 3 blank signed cheques from her. The loan was sanctioned with interest of 4% per month. After 6 to 7 months, she had taken another loan of Rs.15,000/- from the respondent on similar terms. She had been making payment of interests to the respondent regularly. 10. After taking aforesaid plea, appellant had made the quoted slanderous statement. Now, the only dispute revolves around the question that whether by making aforesaid slanderous statement, appellant was entitled for protection of any of the exceptions provided with Section 499 IPC. It is not in dispute that such statements were actually made by the appellant or that during an appeal preferred by appellant against her conviction in that case , she had also offered to tender apology. But somehow parties Page 5 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 could not come to a settlement. The case laws cited on behalf of appellant dealt with the ingredients of Section 499 IPC and the scope of protection granted under exception 9. The gist of the observations made by courts in the above mentioned case laws is that the element of mens rea must be there, while making slanderous statement so as to defame the complainant. Exception 9 protects making of such statement in good faith for the protection of interest of the accused or of any other person or for the public good. Apparently the alleged statement made by appellant was not made for the purpose of public good. She has taken plea that it was made in order to protect her interest and without any intention to defame the respondent. 11. In the case of Harbhajan Singh (Supra), Supreme Court recognized that while invoking any exception, the onus cast upon the accused is discharged on the basis of preponderance of probability. There is certainly no hard and fast rule to make assessment of good faith or malice on the part of an accused. It's a matter of inference to be raised on the basis of facts and circumstances of the case as well as the capacity and intelligence of the person/accused. 12. The question of protection of interest was dealt with Madras High Court in the case of Alli Rani (supra), wherein in a civil proceeding against enforceability of a Will, the court found that even though the imputations made in that case might not be true, but same could be made in order to protect the interest by the accused in good faith and hence, defamation was not found to be made out. 13. Coming back to the facts of this case, it has to be seen that under what circumstance the slanderous statement was made by the appellant. Though, the slanderous statement to the exclusion of other part of statement given by appellant, did not have any direct bearing on the Page 6 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 merits of that case, however, if it is read conjointly with the preceding part of statement, then it can be seen that the appellant was taking a plea that she used to make payment of interest to the respondent regularly at his office. But due to incident of attempt to sexual abuse, she stopped visiting his office to pay interest and rather she started visiting house of respondent along with her daughter, for making payment of interest. Payment of this interest was being allegedly made in respect of the loan taken by the appellant. Such contention of the appellant was directed against the plea of respondent in that case that he had given a friendly loan to the appellant. Normally in friendly loan, no interest is charged by any one and probably for such reasons, the appellant had been referring to the instances of making payment of interest. While giving description of making payment of interest, she happened to make the slanderous part of statement, which became basis for her prosecution for defamation. In these circumstances, it cannot be said that such statement was given by appellant without having any occasion to make such remarks. In order to prove that the statement was made in good faith to protect her interest, appellant was not required to prove the truth of that statement. It was sufficient for the appellant to show on the basis of preponderance of probability that the imputations were made in good faith and in the process of protecting her rights/interest. 14. The trial court found appellant guilty on the basis of finding that she did not prove the truth of those allegations, which were contained in the slanderous remark and such imputations against the character of the respondent were made with a purpose to prejudice the mind and the out look of the presiding officer of that case, so as to deliver a favorable judgment in favour of the appellant. Such findings of the trial court itself recognizes the fact that the imputations were made in the process of Page 7 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Criminal Appeal No.1172/2016 protecting her interest by the appellant and therefore, one cannot rule out the possibility that such statement was made in good faith to protect her interest by the appellant. 15. Keeping in view my foregoing discussions, findings and applying the legal principles arising out of exception no.9 to Section 499 IPC, I find that the case in hand is covered within exception 9 and therefore, conviction of appellant for offence punishable under Section 500 IPC cannot be sustained. Accordingly, appellant is acquitted of the charges. Appeal stands allowed and impugned judgment of conviction dated 30.03.2016 and order on sentence dated 05.05.2016 are set aside. Announced in the open court PULASTYA PRAMACHALA) today on 09.11.2016 Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) (This order contains 8 pages) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Page 8 of 8 (Pulastya Pramachala) Additional Sessions Judge (Shahdara) Karkardooma Courts, Delhi