Brahm Singh vs The State (N.C.T. Of Delhi) on 7 May, 2016 1 IN THE COURT OF SHRI A.K.KUHAR ASJ/SPECIAL JUDGE-NDPS/SOUTH DISTRICT SAKET COURT COMPLEX, NEW DELHI Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 1. Brahm Singh S/o Late Sh. Ram Lal R/o Ram Lal Farm, Village-Fatehpur Asola, Dera More, New Delhi-74. ....Applicant VERSUS 1. The State (N.C.T. of Delhi) Investigating Officer/S.H.O., P.S.-Mehrauli/ Through its Department of Prosecution 2. Narendra Kumar Batra, S/o Sh. Dharamvir Batra R/o W-11, Greater Kailash, Part-II, New Delhi. 3. Manish Arora, S/o Late Sh. B.L. Arora, R/o E-30, Greater Kailash, Part-I, New Delhi. 4. Mrs. Asha Narang, W/o Sh. S.P. Narang, R/o A-43, New Friends, Colony, New Delhi. 5. Kewal Khullar, S/o Sh. Amarnath Khullar, R/o F-37, South Extension, Part-I, New Delhi ........Respondents/ Accused Persons Computer ID No: 02406R0 Date of institution : 20.08.2014 Date of arguments : 05.04.2016 Date of order : 07.05.2016 Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 Brahm Singh vs. State & Ors. 2 ORDER 1. By this order I shall dispose of the application filed by the applicant Brahm Singh under Section 340 Cr.P.C. read with Section 177 / 181 / 182 / 193 / 195 / 499 / 500 / 34 IPC against the respondents mentioned in the memo of parties, to initiate action against these respondents for the offences mentioned above. This application under Section 340 Cr.P.C. has been filed in this Court as this is stated to be the successor Court of Sh. P.S. Teji, Ld. A.S.J., New Delhi (As his Lordship then was). 2. This application under Section 340 Cr.P.C. has been couched in the form of a criminal complaint with a prayer to summon the respondents for their trial and punishment according to law or any other relief from this Court, which it deems fit and appropriate under the given circumstances and in the interest of justice. The Ld. counsel for the applicant submitted that in fact the applicant had initially filed a criminal complaint before a Ld. Magistrate. However, the same was withdrawn with a liberty to file petition before the Court of Sessions. 3. Despite the nomenclature given to the petition and the prayer made therein, the petition is being treated as an application under Section 340 Cr.P.C. which provides for filing of complaint by a Court for the commission of the offence mentioned in the Section 195 (1) Cr.P.C., committed during the proceedings in the said Court. 4. The Ld. counsel for the applicant submitted that a false complaint was made by respondent no. 2 Sh. N.K. Batra against the applicant and his father Late Sh. Ram Lal, which led to registration of a case under Section 342 / 323 / 457 / 395 and 147 IPC vide FIR No. 690/1997, PS-Mehrauli. After the charge sheet was filed the trial was held in the Court of Sh. P.S. Teji, Additional Sessions Judge, New Delhi (As his Lordship then was), and the applicant and his father Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 Brahm Singh vs. State & Ors . 3 were acquitted vide judgment dated 21st November, 2007. It is submitted by the Ld. counsel that the complaint made by Sh. N.K. Batra, which led to register an FIR No. 690/1997, PS-Mehrauli, was a bundle of lies and false. The witnesses, who appeared in the said case during the trial namely Asha Narang, Kewal Khullar and Manish Arora (respondent No. 4, 5 and 3) have also given false statement in the Court. Therefore, they have committed an offence under Section 177 / 181 / 182 / 193 and 195 of Indian Penal Code and also an offence under Section 499 / 500 IPC, read with Section 34 IPC. The applicant has therefore prayed that since these offences have been committed in relation the proceedings of the Court and the witnesses had tendered their evidence also in the proceedings of the Court, a complaint under section 340 Cr.P.C be filed by Court. Section 340 Cr.P.C. provides the procedure to be followed with regard to the offences mentioned in Section 195 Cr.P.C. which reads as under : "340. Procedure in cases mentioned in Section 195 .-- (1) When, upon an application made to it in this behalf or otherwise, any Court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice that an inquiry should be made into any offence referred to in Clause (b) of sub- section (1) of Section 195 , which appears to have been committed in or in relation to a proceeding in that court or, as the case may be, in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in that court, such court may, after such preliminary inquiry, if any, as it thinks necessary,-- (a) record a finding to that effect; (b) make a complaint thereof in writing; (c) send it to a Magistrate of the First Class having jurisdiction; (d) take sufficient security for the appearance of the accused before such Magistrate, or if the alleged offence is non-bailable and the court thinks it necessary so to do, send the accused in custody to such Magistrate; and (e) bind over any person to appear and give evidence before such Magistrate. Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 Brahm Singh vs. State & Ors . 4 (2) The power conferred on a court by sub- section (1) in respect of an offence may, in any case where that court has neither made a complaint under sub-section (1) in respect of that offence nor rejected an application for the making of such complaint, be exercised by the court to which such former court is subordinate within the meaning of sub-section (4) of Section 195 ." 5. Section 340 Cr.P.C. thus provides for at filing of complaint for any of the offence referred to in Sub-Section (1) of Section 195 Cr.P.C., if the Court is of the opinion that it is "expedient in the interest of justice". The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rugmini Ammal vs. V. Narayana Reddiar & Ors. (2007) 12 Supreme Court Cases 611, has given guidance as to when Section 340 Cr.P.C is to be resorted to for filing a complaint by the Court. It has been held : "23. In view of the language used in Section 340 Cr.P.C., the court is not bound to make a complaint regarding commission of an offence referred to in Section 195(1)(b) , as the section is conditioned by the words 'court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of justice'. This shows that such a course will be adopted only if the interest of justice requires and not in every case. Before filing of the complaint, the court may hold a preliminary enquiry and record a finding to the effect that it is expedient in the interests of justice that enquiry should be made into any of the offences referred to in Section 195(1)(b) . This expediency will normally be judged by the court by weighing not the magnitude of injury suffered by the person effected by such forgery or forged document, but having regard to the effect or impact, such commission of offence has upon administration of justice." 6. The Court therefore, must form a view that it is expedient in the interest of justice to file a complaint, minus this opinion no complaint can be made under Section 340 Cr.P.C. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed as above that expediency is judged by the Court by not weighing the Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 Brahm Singh vs. State & Ors . 5 magnitude of injury suffered by the person affected, but having regard to the effect or impact, such commission of offence has upon administration of justice. Therefore, first the Court has to form a view that the offence as mentioned in Section 195 (1) Cr.P.C. have been committed, secondly it is expedient in the interest of justice to file a complaint under Section 340 Cr.P.C. 7. At this stage, it would be appropriate to see findings in the judgment dated 21.11.2007 whereby the applicant and his father have been acquitted. The perusal of the judgment shows that one N.K. Batra had made a complaint that he had a farm house alongside the farm houses of one Manish Arora, Asha Narang, Kewal Arora and Vivek Arora. All the farm houses were having boundary walls and they had one common way, starting from Dera More and going up to Kewal Khullar's farm. They all have been using this common way for about 2½ years. It was further alleged that one Ram Lal (one of the accused in the case, who expired during the trial) had his land next to farm house of Sh. Manish Arora and he had also been using this common road. It was alleged further that they all had some civil litigation also with Ram Lal and his son Brahm Singh. The main allegation was that about 5-6 months ago from the date of incident, the said Ram Lal and Brahm Singh had blocked the road by erecting a wall. The matter was taken in the Court of S.D.M., Hauz Khas and the wall was demolished on 15.071997 and it was again erected and it was again demolished and cleared on 07.11.1997 under the order of Ld. S.D.M. It is alleged that thereafter the said N.K. Batra had kept three guards namely Saukhpal Singh, Bahadur and Mr. Mishra. The incident took place on 4/5 th December, 1997 at about 3:00 am when Ram Lal and his son Brahm Singh Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 Brahm Singh vs. State & Ors . 6 came alongwith 15-20 person armed with Lathis and again erected the wall. They also trespassed into the farm house of Sh. N.K. Batra and stolen his electric meter and phone. The above chowkidars were also threatened. 8. During the trial all the witnesses were examined. However, the witness Sukhpal Singh, who was Chowkidar, turned hostile and did not support the incident, which took place in the intervening night of 04/05.12.1997. 9. While acquitting the accused in the case, the Ld. A.S.J. has opined that the prosecution failed to prove incident as happened on 04/05.12.1997 because the main witness Sukhpal Singh had turned hostile. Neither the allegations of taking away telephonic instrument could be established as the main witness had turned hostile. Apart from this, the Ld. A.S.J also observed that there are contradictions in the statement of witnesses and the other witnesses examined by the prosecution had only hearsay evidence which is not permissible under law. With these observations the Ld. ASJ vide order dated 21.11.2007 had acquitted the accused. 10. For filing a complaint under Section 340 Cr.P.C. an observation was very much necessary that the complaint was false and the witnesses had given a false statement. The judgment does not say that the complaint was false and the witnesses have deposed falsely. The judgment is based on two findings that the main witness who had seen incident did not support prosecution and was declared hostile witness and the other witnesses had only hearsay evidence with regard to the incident of 04/05/12/1997. Thus there is no categorical finding that the complaint made by Sh. N.K. Batra was false and the witnesses, (who are arrayed as respondent/accused in the present application) had given a false statement. Their statement was not believed because it was Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 Brahm Singh vs. State & Ors . 7 considered to be hearsay. The acquittal is squarely on the ground that the prosecution failed to prove its case and it is not on the ground that the complainant and the allegations made therein were false. 11. Furthermore, the judgment was passed in the year 2007 and the applicant had come to this Court in the year 2014. Therefore, it is not considered expedient in the interest of justice to file the complaint under Section 340 Cr.P.C. on the basis of this material on record. 12. Therefore, in the above factual position and the material on record, I have not found it a fit case for making a complaint under Section 340 Cr.P.C. The miscellaneous application is, therefore, stands dismissed. 13. Trial Court Record (TCR) be sent back with a copy of this order. 14. The file be consigned to Record Room. Announced in the open Court on 7th May, 2016. (Ajay Kumar Kuhar) Special Judge (NDPS) South District: Saket Misc. Appl. No. 03/14 Brahm Singh vs. State & Ors .