State vs . Nafis on 20 April, 2022 IN THE COURT OF SH. PUNEET NAGPAL METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-07, WEST DISTRICT, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI STATE VERSUS NAFIS Computer ID No. 68744/16 FIR No. 143/2013 P.S. Paschim Vihar (East) U/S382/411/34 IPC Sh. Rohit Kumar S/o Sh. Rakesh Kumar R/o Vill. Khazipur, Tehs. Chhibramau, Distt. Kannauj, Uttar Pradesh. ... Complainant VERSUS Nafis S/o Sh. Safiq R/o N-256, Raghubir Nagar, Khyala. New Delhi. .... Accused Date of Institution : 16.07.2013 Date on which judgment was reserved : 18.04.2022 Date of judgment : 20.04.2022 Final Order : Convicted FIR No. 143/2013 Page 1 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis JUDGMENT The important facts of the present case are as follows : 1. In the instant case, an FIR bearing No. 143/2013 was lodged by the complainant Sh. Rohit Kumar against the accused namely Nafis alleging therein that on 19.05.2013, at about 10:30 pm, near BG-8 Market, Gas Godown, Ganda Nala, Paschim Vihar, the accused Nafis had along with his associate namely Moharpal (since declared Juvenile), in furtherance of their common intention had committed theft of Rs. 300/- from the possession of the complainant, after having made preparations for causing hurt/ restraint to any person, in order to commit theft. The accused along with his associate was caught red handed by the complainant and one public person, at that time and therefore, the accused namely Nafis was handed over to the police. Investigation was completed and challan u/s 173 Cr. P.C was filed against the accused Nafis in respect of offence punishable u/s 382 / 34 IPC. 2. Cognizance was taken and the production warrants were issued and the accused was produced before the court. After compliance of the provisions of section 207 Cr. P.C., vide order dated 28.11.2013 passed by the then Ld. MM-07, (West), Tis Hazari, charges were framed u/s 382 / 34 IPC against the accused Nafis to which accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. FIR No. 143/2013 Page 2 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis PROSECUTION EVIDENCE 3. To prove the charge against the accused, prosecution examined five prosecution witnesses. 4. PW-1/complainant namely Sh. Rohit Kumar has deposed that he was residing at Nihal Vihar along-with his brother Mohit Kumar and that he was working as electrician in Inderpuri, Delhi. He deposed that he used bicycle for commuting to his office at the relevant time. PW1 deposed that in May, 2013, on one night, he was going to his home on bicycle after finishing his work at Inderpuri and at about 10:30 PM, when he reached near Gas Godown, Ganda Nala, Paschim Vihar, two persons came on a scooty and they had stopped him by putting their scooty in front of his bicycle on the pretext of asking the address. PW1 further deposed that suddenly, the pillion rider, got off the scooty, took out a knife and came close to him/PW1. It was the version of PW1 that the said person had caught hold of his neck and had took out his purse, containing cash of Rs. 300/-, from the back pocket of his pant and one mobile phone from the pocket of his shirt. He further deposed that the driver of scooty had also assisted the pillion rider, in robbing him. PW1 deposed that in the meantime, one security guard namely Karamveer came on a motorcycle and he gave him signal to stop. Subsequently, the said security guard had apprehended both the aforesaid riders of the scooty with his assistance. Thereafter, PW1 took his mobile phone back and made a call at 100 number. After some-time, police from PS Paschim Vihar and PCR van came at the spot and they handed over the FIR No. 143/2013 Page 3 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis apprehended person to the police. He proved his statement (Ex.PW-1/A ) given to the police. He deposed that police had seized the recovered cash of Rs. 300/- and the knife, vide seizure memo (s) Ex.PW-1/B and Ex.PW- 1/C. He also proved the seizure memo the Scooty (Ex.PW-1/D). During the course of his examination-in-chief, the accused Nafis was identified by the complainant/PW1 to be one of the said two persons, who had robbed him, on the relevant date with knife along-with his associate. PW1 also proved the arrest memo (Ex.PW-1/E) and personal search memo (Ex.PW-1/F) of the accused Nafis and the Site plan (Ex.PW-1/G), which was also prepared at the instance of PW1. PW1 also correctly identified the case property, during the course of his testimony. The case property (Knife) is Ex.P1 and the case property (three currency nots of Rs. 100/- each) is Ex. P2(colly). The case property (Scooty Activa) was also correctly identified by PW1. 5. In his cross-examination, PW1 deposed that he does not remember the number of the scooty of the accused. PW1 admitted the fact that 4-5 persons along-with Karamveer had collected at the spot after he had raised the alarm and that the police had reached the spot within 4- 5 minutes of gathering of public. He deposed that he was alone at the time of incident and that Mohit was not present with him. At the same time, no public was present at the spot, as it was 10:30 PM. He deposed that the police remained at the spot for about 10 to 15 minutes and that he had remained at the PS from 12:30 AM to 01:00 AM, where he had signed the documents. He deposed that no statement of any other person FIR No. 143/2013 Page 4 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis was recorded by the police in his presence. He also deposed that the accused had tried to escape on foot and that the accused were apprehended at the time while they were trying to escape, by climbing the wall near ganda nala. PW1 categorically denied the suggestions of the accused to the effect that nothing was recovered from the possession of the accused or that the accused was not present at the spot and that the accused had not snatched the belongings of PW1 at point of knife. PW1 also denied the fact that he had identified the accused, to be one of the offender, as the accused had failed to give him, the money, which he was demanding from the accused. PW1 also denied the fact that he was deposing falsely at the instance of his brother Mohit and the police. 6. PW2/ASI Madan Lal deposed that on 20.05.2013, while he was posted as Duty Officer at PS Paschim Vihar, he received a rukka through Ct. Sudhir, which was sent by SI Ganga Ram. He deposed that on the basis of the said rukka, he had registered the FIR (Ex. PW2/A) of the instant case (FIR bearing No. 143/2013 u/s 382 / 411 / 34 IPC). He proved the endorsement made by him on the original rukka (Ex.PW2/B). He further deposed that after registration of the FIR, he had handed over the copy of FIR and the original rukka to Ct. Sudhir for handing over the same to SI Ganga Ram. During his cross-examination, PW2 categorically denied the suggestion of the accused to the effect that all the DD entries were manipulated and fabricated at the instance of the SHO. 7. PW-3/eye-witness namely Sh. Karambir S/o Sh. FIR No. 143/2013 Page 5 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis Brahm Dutt deposed that at the relevant time, he was working as Delhi Home Guard and that on 19.05.2013, at about 10:30 PM, while he was going to his duty at PS Rajouri Garden, and had reached at Gas -Godown road, he saw that the accused had already apprehended one person, who was unknown to him and that the said person was shouting 'Bachao Bachao'. It was his version, during his examination-in-chief that when he had reached at the spot, he saw that one person had caught his neck and two persons were searching his pocket. During the course of his examination-in-chief, the accused Nafis, who was present in the court, was identified by the witness/PW3 to be one of the said persons, who had caught the complainant by neck. He deposed that when he had reached at the spot on his motorcycle, all the 3 persons had fled from the spot. PW3 further deposed that he saw that one scooty (make Honda Activa), belonging to the accused persons, was parked at the spot. He stated that he had asked the accused persons to come to the spot and by telling them that, even if, they do not come, they will be traced out by the registration number of the scooty. Thereafter, two of the assaulters came to the spot, and one of them fled away saying that they will not be spared. He deposed that he had searched the scooty before the accused persons, came to the spot and he found one long knife in the dickey of the scooty. It was his version that the complainant had called at 100 number and that the PCR van had arrived at the spot. Subsequently, police officials had taken the accused persons to the PS. PW3 further deposed that an amount of Rs. 300/- was recovered from the possession of the accused, which was snatched from the possession of the complainant. He deposed that the IO FIR No. 143/2013 Page 6 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis had recorded his statement. During the course of his examination-in- chief, PW3 correctly identified the case property (Ex. P-1) i.e. the scooty and the Knife, which was recovered from the possession of the accused. 8. In his cross-examination, PW3 deposed that on the date of the incident, he was going from Gas-godown road to PS Rajouri Garden at about 10:30 and that the distance between PS Rajouri Garden and Gas-godown might be about one and half to two kms. He deposed that he does not remember the time when PCR had reached, at the spot and the time, it took, to take the accused from the spot to the PS. It was his version that two officials came in the PCR Van and that apart from him and the accused Nafis, whom he had apprehended, one public person was present, at the spot, when PCR had reached. PW3 categorically denied the suggestion of the accused to the effect that that nothing was recovered from the accused and that the accused Nafis was falsely implicated in the present case at the instance of the IO. 9. PW-4/HC Sudhir deposed that in the intervening night of 19.05.2013 & 20.05.2013, while he was posted as a constable at PS Paschim Vihar, on emergency duty along-with the IO/SI Ganga Ram, they had received one DD bearing No. 39A dated 19.05.2013. Thereafter, he had along-with the IO/SI Ganga Ram went to the spot i.e. BG-8 Market, near Gas Godown, Paschim Vihar, Delhi, where complainant namely Rohit Kumar S/o Sh. Rakesh Kumar, along-with Delhi Home Guard (DHG) namely Karamveer S/o Sh. Braham Dutt were found FIR No. 143/2013 Page 7 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis present. He deposed that they had caught hold of two accused persons, who were later handed over to them. He further deposed that one of the accused who was a juvenile namely Moharpal S/o Sh. Seva Ram was caught red handed with stolen property i.e. cash amounting to Rs.300/-, which was handed over to him by the other accused namely Nafis, who had stolen the said cash amount from the complainant namely Rohit. He proved the seizure memo Ex.PW-2/B. It was his version that the second accused namely Nafis was caught red handed with one vegetable cutting knife, which was seized vide seizure memo Ex.PW-1/C. He deposed that the IO had recorded the statement (Ex.PW1/A) of the complainant namely Sh. Rohit and on the basis of the same, the IO prepared the tehrir. The said tehrir, was handed over the same to him for registration of FIR and on the basis of the same, he had got the FIR of the instant case registered at PS Paschim Vihar. Subsequently, after registration of FIR, he went back to the spot and had handed over the copy of the said FIR to the IO. He proved the arrest memo (Ex.PW-1/E) of the accused namely Nafis and the apprehension memo (Ex.PW-4/A) of other accused namely Moharpal, who was apprehended in the presence of his father. He also proved the seizure memo (Ex.PW-1/D) of the Scooty bearing No.DL- 4SAC-7885, which was used in the offence from the spot. He deposed that thereafter, IO prepared the sketch memo of the seized knife vide memo (Ex.PW-4/B). Thereafter, the juvenile namely Moharpal was handed over to his father and the IO had prepared all the necessary documents. And had recorded the statement of Delhi Home Guard (DHG) namely Karamveer S/o Sh. Brahamdutt. PW4 also proved the FIR No. 143/2013 Page 8 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis disclosure statement (Ex.PW-4/C) of the accused namely Nafis, personal search memo (Ex.PW-1/F) of the accused namely Nafis. He deposed that his statement under section 161 Cr. P.C. was also recorded by the IO. 10. In his cross-examination, PW4 deposed that he had proceeded to the spot along-with the IO on their private motorcycle. PW4 categorically denied the fact that he never went to the spot. PW4 deposed that he does remember as to whether the IO had made any departure entry, at the time when they went to the spot. He deposed that they reached at the spot, at around 11:15 PM and that some public persons were present at the spot. It was his version that the IO had requested some public persons to join the investigation, however, no one had agreed citing personal reasons. He deposed that the IO had not recorded the names of the said persons, who were requested by him. PW4 categorically denied the suggestion of the accused to the effect that no incriminating case property was recovered from the accused namely Nafis and CCL namely Moharpal. PW4 admitted the fact that the IO had prepared all the documents at the spot and that the last document, which was prepared by the IO was the CCL apprehension memo along-with other documents after conducting the medical examination of CCL. He deposed that at about 12:20 AM, he had reached the PS for registration of FIR along-with tehrir. I deposed that he had went to the PS by taking lift from public person, the name of which was not stated by him. He deposed that he had arrived back to the spot after registration of FIR again by taking lift from some public persons. He admitted the fact that FIR No. 143/2013 Page 9 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis the person who had given him the lift, left him at the spot, where the IO was present. PW4 denied the fact that he was deposing falsely and that all the documents were prepared while sitting in the PS. 11. PW-5/IO/Insp. Ganga Ram, deposed that in the intervening night of 19.05.2013 & 20.05.2013, he was on emergency duty along-with Ct. Sudhir. He deposed on same lines as PW4 and deposed that on receiving DD bearing No.39A dated 19.05.2013, he had along- with Ct. Sudhir, went to the spot i.e. BG-8 Market, near Gas Godown, Paschim Vihar, Delhi, where he found that the complainant namely Sh. Rohit Kumar S/o Sh. Rakesh Kumar, along-with Delhi Home Guard (DHG) namely Karamveer S/o Sh. Brahamdutt were present. He deposed on same lines as PW-4. He proved the seizure memo(s) Ex. PW-2/B, Ex.PW-1/C, sketch memo of the seized knife Ex.PW-4/B. He deposed that on the basis of the statement of the complainant, he had prepared tehrir (Ex.PW-5/A), which was handed over to Ct. Sudhir for registration of FIR. Thereafter, Ct. Sudhir went to the PS Paschim Vihar for registration of FIR and had got recorded the FIR of the instant case, on the basis of the said tehrir.. Thereafter, he had prepared the site plan (Ex.PW-1/G) at the instance of the complainant namely Sh. Rohit Kumar. He proved the arrest memo (Ex.PW-1/E) of the accused namely Nafis and his disclosure statement (Ex.PW-4/C). He also proved the seizure memo (Ex.PW-1/D) of one Scooty bearing No.DL-4SAC-7885, which was used in the offence from the spot. He deposed that the juvenile namely Moharpal, after his medical examination was handed over to his father, FIR No. 143/2013 Page 10 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis after preparation of the necessary documents. He deposed that he had recorded the statement of Delhi Home Guard (DHG) namely Karamveer S/o Sh. Braham Dutt under section 161 Cr. P.C. He also proved the personal search memo (Ex.PW-1/F) of the accused namely Nafis. He deposed that all the case property was deposited by him in the malkhana. Thereafter, after completion of the investigation, he had filed the instant chargesheet against the accused namely Nafis in the concerned Court and PIR of the other CCL namely Moharpal was filed in the concerned JJB. 12. In his cross-examination, PW-5/Insp. Ganga Ram, deposed that he had reached at the spot along-with HC Sudhir at around 11:15 PM and that they had reached the spot on their personal bike. He deposed that he does not remember whether the accused namely Nafis was caught hold of by the complainant or by the Home Guard or the fact whether the CCL namely Moharpal was caught hold of by the complainant or by the Home Guard. He deposed that he was carrying the IO kit, along-with him, at the spot for the sealing of the case property. He admitted the fact that he had not served notice to public persons including Security Guard of the Gas-Godown and the shopkeeper of BG-8 Market, who had refused to join the investigation, as was requested by him, giving their reasonable excuses. He deposed that a sum of Rs.300/- was seized from the CCL Moharpal and the alleged knife was recovered from the accused namely Nafis. He categorically denied the fact that the knife was recovered from the dicky of the alleged Scooty/Scooter. He deposed that the alleged spot is at a distance of 1.5 KMs from the PS Paschim Vihar. FIR No. 143/2013 Page 11 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis PW5 also admitted the fact that the signatures of the complainant namely Rohit, Home Guard namely Karamveer and HC Sudhir are not present on the site plan. He denied the fact that the alleged site plan was prepared while sitting in the PS and therefore, the signatures of no person, referred above, was present on the site plan. He deposed that the seizure memo Ex.PW-4/C was in his handwriting and that the same was written from top to bottom in one go. He further deposed that he had searched the Scooty but nothing was recovered from the said Scooty. He stated that he had recorded all the statements at the spot and that the seal after its use, was handed over to HC Sudhir. PW5 admitted the fact that no seal handing over memo was placed on record. PW5 denied the fact that he was deposing falsely at the instance of the complainant and that all the written work was done while sitting in the PS. 13. Subsequent to the examination of PW-5, vide proceedings carried out under section 294 Cr. P.C, the accused had admitted the genuineness of the DD entry bearing No. 39A dated 19.05.2013 and therefore, the concerned DD writer was dropped from the list of witnesses. Subsequently, PE was directed to be closed at the request of the Ld. APP for the State as all the relevant prosecution witnesses had been examined. Thereafter, the matter was fixed for recording the statement of the accused u/s 313 Cr. P.C. 14. In his statement u/s 313 Cr. P.C, the accused took the defence of false implication and pleaded innocence. Accused submitted FIR No. 143/2013 Page 12 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis that he was caught at the spot merely on the basis of suspicion and that he had not committed the alleged theft. At that stage, the accused stated that he does not wish to lead any defence evidence. Consequently, DE was directed to be closed and the matter was fixed for addressing Final arguments. 15. I have heard the Ld. APP for the State and Ld. Counsel for the accused and perused the record carefully in light of the arguments advanced. 16. Learned APP for State has argued that prosecution has proved its case against the accused by examining the material witnesses, that is PW-1/ complainant and one public witness i.e. PW3, who have supported the case of the prosecution in entirety. At the same time, it has submitted by Ld. APP for the State, that the accused was caught red-handed immediately after the accused had committed the theft in question. He has argued that the complainant/PW-1 has deposed with consistency regarding all the incriminating facts which form gravamen of charge framed against the accused. By referring to the respective testimony of PW1/ complainant and of the testimony of PW3, Ld. APP for State has stated that sufficient incriminating evidence against the accused in the present case has been adduced by the prosecution and therefore, the accused deserve to be held guilty for the commission of the alleged offence. FIR No. 143/2013 Page 13 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis 17. Per contra, Ld. Counsel for the accused has argued that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the alleged charges qua the accused. It was submitted on behalf of the accused that, there are material contradictions, in the version of events, as have been deposed by the complainant/PW1 and PW3, who is the alleged eye-witness. He has argued that the testimony of both PW1 as well as PW3, ought not to be accepted at its face value and must be taken with a pinch of salt. Ld. Defence Counsel submits that the facts proved by the prosecution, do not unerringly point out towards the guilt of the accused and this would inexorably result in the acquittal of the accused qua the charges framed against him. 18. Before proceeding any further, it would be appropriate to reproduce the relevant statutory provision i.e. Section 382 IPC. 382 IPC which reads as: Section382 : Theft after preparation made for causing death, hurt or restraint in order to the committing of the theft :- Whoever commits theft, having made preparation for causing death, or hurt, or restraint, or fear of death, or of hurt, or of restraint, to any person, in order to the committing of such theft, or in order to the effecting of his escape after the committing of such theft, or in order to the retaining of property taken by such theft, shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine. FIR No. 143/2013 Page 14 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis Thus, in order to prove a charge for an offence under Section 382 IPC, the prosecution is required to prove the following ingredients: (a) A person commits theft. (b) He commits such theft after having made preparation for causing: (I) death or, (II) hurt or, (III) restraint or, (IV) fear of death, hurt or restraint. (c) Such preparation is made in order to (I) the committing of such theft or, (II) the effecting of escape after theft or, (III) the retaining of property taken by such theft. 19. In the instant case, the principal allegation/charge is that of having committed theft, of Rs. 300/-, from the possession of complainant coupled with the fact that the said theft was committed, after having made preparation of causing hurt and restraint by the accused Nafis and his associate. Therefore, to begin with, let us first determine/analyze, whether the prosecution has been able to prove the fact that the theft of property of the complainant, was committed by the accused Nafis along with his associate. FIR No. 143/2013 Page 15 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis 20. In order to prove its case, the prosecution has examined the complainant Rohit as PW1. In his examination in chief, PW1 has categorically stated that on the day of the incident, accused Nafis had along with his associate, who was caught red-handed at the spot by him and one public person namely Karambir, had committing the theft in question and that the stolen property (Cash amount of Rs. 300/-) was also recovered from the possession of the associate of the accused namely Moharpal. At the same time, it also stands unambiguously proved from the deposition of PW3/ Karambir that the accused Nafis had in-deed committed the alleged theft and that he was caught red-handed along with his associate Moharpal (since declared juvenile) at the spot itself by PW3. 21. I find no reason as to why the complainant/PW1, PW3 or the police officials would falsely implicate the accused Nafis, there being no previous rivalry/enmity against him. The defence has failed to prove on record, any motive which could be assigned to the complainant for falsely implicating the accused, especially in light of the fact that the accused Nafis was a stranger to both PW1 and PW3. Not even an iota of evidence, much less cogent, has been brought on record, to prove the defence, advanced on behalf of the accused Nafis that he has been falsely implicated in the instant case. Thus, the fact that the accused Nafis and his associate had committed the theft in question, has been proved by the prosecution beyond doubt. 22. In the instant case, the accused has been alleged to FIR No. 143/2013 Page 16 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis have committed the aggravated form of the offence of theft, punishable under section 382 / 34 IPC. Thus, it remains to be seen, whether, the facts, which have been proffered by the prosecution, attract the imposition of liability, upon the accused, in respect of the aggravated form of offence of theft punishable under section 382 IPC. Perusal of record reveals that though, the testimony of both PW1/complainant and PW3, clearly proves the fact that the alleged theft of Rs. 300/- was committed by the accused Nafis along with his associate namely Moharpal, however, there are material discrepancies and inconsistencies in the respective testimony of PW1 and PW3, with regard to the manner, in which the entire transaction of committing theft in question took place. The use of the knife, by the accused Nafis and his associate, in committing the theft in question, remains doubtful and is not proved beyond doubt. Therefore, it cannot be held beyond doubt that the theft in question, was committed by the accused, in the manner, which squarely falls within the parameters, as detailed in section 382 IPC. 23. Accordingly, in view of my above discussion, the allegations against the accused Nafis, to the effect that he had committed the theft in question, along with his associate stands proved, only qua the offence punishable under section 379 / 34 IPC. 24. Consequently, the accused namely Nafis stands convicted in respect of offences punishable u/s 379 / 34 IPC. FIR No. 143/2013 Page 17 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis 25. Let the convict be heard on the quantum of sentence. 26. Copy of judgment be given to the convict free of cost and copy of judgment be placed on case file. Digitally signed by PUNEET NAGPAL PUNEET DN: c=IN, o=Office of the District and Sessions Judge (HQs), 2.5.4.20=384cfa84306e52a2e839210 ceb19057ed25ba2f78731ed0864417 Decided on 20.04.2022 NAGPAL 76400286cb2, ou=DELHI DISTRICT Announced in the Open Court COURTS,CID - 6788452, postalCode=110052, st=Delhi, cn=PUNEET NAGPAL Date: 2022.04.20 15:32:55 +05'30' (PUNEET NAGPAL) MM-07, West District THC/Delhi FIR No. 143/2013 Page 18 of 18 P.S. Paschim Vihar State Vs. Nafis