Saroj & Anr. vs . Ruby on 9 May, 2018 IN THE COURT OF DR. HARDEEP KAUR, ADJ­02, SHAHDARA, KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI C.S No. 2590/16 Saroj & Anr. vs. Ruby 09.05.2018 Present: None. O R D E R 1. This order shall dispose of application u/O 7 Rule 11 CPC filed on behalf of defendant for the rejection of plaint of plaintiff. 2. Plaintiff has filed the present suit for Damages for defamation and Mandatory Injunction against the defendant. 3. Brief facts as necessary for adjudication of the present application are that plaintiff no. 1 & 2 are wife and husband, plaintiff no. 2 is working in Delhi police and posted as HC in PS New Friends Colony, Delhi. The plaintiffs are having deep root and good reputation in the society. Son of the plaintiffs Nitin Kumar got married with the defendant, therefore, defendant is a daughter in law of the plaintiffs. Defendant is doing government job in Delhi police as constable in PS Sonia Vihar, Delhi. It is stated that on 16.06.2016, the defendant made a false complaint on the fabricated and CS-2590/16 page 1 of 14 concocted grounds in CAW Cell and made false allegations against the plaintiffs, wherein she has intentionally and deliberately with the motive to defame the dignity and reputation of the plaintiffs in the society, made highly defamatory allegations (as stated in para 4 of the plaint) that her mother in law and plaintiff no. 2 admitted to have participating in group sex and that they had illicit relations with husband of each other. That when she told her husband, he also conceded the same. The assertions of the plaintiffs are that they got humiliated by filing such complaint by the defendant against them and by publishing such words/material in the public by filing complaint in CAW Cell NE, Delhi. Complaint dated 16.06.2016 filed by the defendant in CAW Cell, later on, got turned into FIR no. 342/2016, PS GTB enclave, Delhi under Section 498 A/406/354/328/377/506/323/34 IPC . The above statements are deliberate and intentional act, committed by the defendant with the motive to defame the dignity and reputation of the plaintiffs and demoralize the plaintiffs in the society without any fault on their parts. Such baseless allegations made in the public domain is an illegal act and invites penal action as well as paying damage to the person whose reputation and dignity has been defamed. It is stated that the allegations as stated above are amounts to publication, which are highly defamatory in nature. Plaintiffs are being respected members of the CS-2590/16 page 2 of 14 society got humiliated by filing such complaint by the defendant against them by levelling false and baseless such incrementing words/material in the public by filing the complaint in CAW Cell, North East Delhi. Due to the above said false defamatory allegations, dignity and reputation of the plaintiffs are being damaged in the society. 4. The defendant has filed the present application on the ground that on the allegations mentioned in the complaint of the defendant dated 16.06.2016 in CAW Cell North East Delhi, FIR no. 342/2016 PS GTB Enclave, Delhi u/s 498 A/406/354/328/377/506/323/34 IPC has been registered in which charge sheet has been filed. The investigation of FIR no. 342/16, PS GTB Enclave have been concluded by police and the challan has been filed by the police u/s 173 Cr.PC pending in the court of concerned MM, in the challan the police has named the plaintiffs as an accused. It is not disputed that the charge sheet in the said FIR is still pending trial. It is stated that the present suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable because of being without cause of action. As such, this suit is liable to be rejected u/o 7 Rule 11 r/w Section 151 CPC. Defendant has relied upon the following case laws :­ ( a) T. Arivanandam vs T.V Satyapal :& Anr, SLP (civil) No. 4483 of 1977. CS-2590/16 page 3 of 14 (b) Girish Kakkar & Anr. vs. Dr. (Mrs) Dhanwantri & Ors, 1991 Crl. M (M) 127 of 1987 DOD 25.05.1990 ( c) Ashok Kumar Gogia vs State of Haryana & Anr Crl. Misc. No. M ­13891/2014, Punjab & Haryana High Court at Chandigarh. ( d) Mahadev I Todale vs Framkfinn Aviation Services Pvt Ltd CM (M ) no. 687/2017 decided on 10.07.2017. 5. In reply, it is stated on behalf of plaintiffs that the present application filed by the defendant is not maintainable in the eyes of law. It is well settled that for deciding the application u/o 7 rule 11 CPC only contents of the suit are considered and defence of the defendant can not be considered at this stage. It is further stated that FIR no. 342/16 are not the defamatory statements/allegations made by the defendant against the plaintiffs. To decide the criminal case under the above mentioned sections, trial court will seek whether ingredients of the above said offence has mentioned in the above said sections are made out or not. The defamatory allegations whether true or not will not effect the finding of the trial court in respect of the abovesaid offences because ingredients of the above said offences are different than the defamatory allegations made by the defendant against the plaintiffs. It is further stated that as per Article 75 of the Limitation Act period of limitation for seeking compensation for libel (written defamatory allegations) is one year from the date CS-2590/16 page 4 of 14 when such libel is published,hence, if the civil suit for compensation is not filed within the limitation, the same cannot be filed after one year from the date of publication of libel, therefore, if the plaintiffs are restrained from filing the civil suit just on the ground that criminal case is pending against them, the plaintiffs will not have any legal remedy to file the civil suit for compensation after expiry of one month. Plaintiffs has relied upon the case law titled as Bikramjeet Ahaluwali and Ors vs Simran Ahluwalia and Anr, decided on 01.05.2015 passed by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. 6. Submissions heard. Record perused. 7. Before proceedings any further, it would be appropriate to refer to the settled proposition of law. The extant law on the point regarding maintainability of suit for damages on account of defamation in respect of allegations made in complaint to police has been summarized in Mahadev I Todale vs Framkfinn Aviation Services Pvt Ltd CM (M ) no. 687/2017 which is reproduced as under:­ 13. This Court in Shri Ram Singh Batra vs. Smt. Sharan Premi 133 (2006) DLT 126 also was concerned with a suit for recovery of damages for defamation by publication in the newspapers of the FIR registered against the plaintiff therein and arrest of the plaintiff therein. It was pleaded that the complaint on the basis of which FIR was registered was false. It was found that the process of criminal law was still on and the plaintiff had not been acquitted or discharged. It was held (i) CS-2590/16 page 5 of 14 that malicious prosecution is actionable as a tort but mere presentation of a false complaint which first seeks to set the criminal law in motion will not furnish an action for damages for malicious prosecution; (ii) that till the plaintiff obtains an order of acquittal or discharge in his favour, no cause of action to file a suit against the defendant on the tort of malicious prosecution accrues; (iii) that the newspaper reports of registration of FIR against the plaintiff and disclosing the nature of offence allged of the plaintiff and of arrest of the plaintiff are also not actionable; (iv) that till, it is established that the FIR in question is based on a false allegation, no action is found maintainable on the newspaper reports; (v) that till the investigation is on, there can be no cause of action. Accordingly, the plaint in the suit was rejected. "14. This court again in Vijay Gulati vs Radhika (2010) 119 DRJ 482 was concerend with maintainability of a suit for damages for defamatory statements made in complaints made to the police and wide spread and open circulation thereof. It was held (a) that till the time of charges levelled against the plaintiff are not disproved or not proved, it could not be said that the allegations in the complaint were without any merit; (b) that the allegations in the complaint could not be said to be defamatory; (c) that a suit for CS-2590/16 page 6 of 14 damages for defamation can not be initiated as a surrogate litigation as a counter blast and to use it as a lever to tame the defendant; (d) that the defendant/ complainant cannot be put on a defensive by initiation of such suit for damages for defamation; (e) that the suit for damages for defamation cannot be used as a lever to get the dragnet by criminal cases; (f) reliance was pleaded on Bira Garari vs Dulhin Somaria AIR 1962 Patna (DB) laying down that in case of defamation on the basis of registration of a cognizable offence, it could not be said that the person had been defamed unless and until the said complaint is tested before the appropriate forum; (g) once a person puts criminal law into action, the other party can not lodge and bring about a suit for defamation so as to stop those criminal proceedings; (h) that the appropriate remedy for such a plaintiff would be either to institute under Section 182 Cr.P.C (i) that the suit for damages for defamation is pre mature till the complaint is rejected. Accordingly the suit held not maintainable and the plaint was rejected. CS-2590/16 page 7 of 14 15...... 14....(e) As far back as in Golap Jan vs Bholanath Khettry MANU/WB/0056/1911 it was held by the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court that though defamation is a good cause of action but even if the complaint to the Magistrate was defamatory still the complainant was entitled to protection from a suit for defamation and this protection was the absolute privilege accorded in the public interest to those who make statements to the court in the course of and in relation to judicial proceedings. The Division Bench of the Madras High Court also in Pedda Sanjivi Reddy vs. Kondasari Koneri Reddi AIR 1926 Mad 521, held that the statements made to the police officer which could only be made with a view to their being repeated on oath before the Magistrate as well as statements in the petition presented to the Magistrate have been invested by the common law of England with absolute privilege which attaches not merely to the actual proceedings of any tribunal exercising judicial function, but to all preliminary steps CS-2590/16 page 8 of 14 which are in accordance with the cognised and reasonable procedure of such a tribunal. It was also held that the public policy which renders the protection of witnesses necessary for the administration of justice necessarily involves that which is a step towards and is part of the administration of justice namely the preliminary examination of wetnesses to find out what they can prove and consequently statements made by a witness to a litigant or his solicitor in preparing proof are absolutely privileged. A subsequent Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Madhab Chandra Ghose vs Nirod Chandra Ghose AIR 1939 CA. 477 added that it is a matter of public policy and administration of justice that witnesses giving their evidence on oath in a Court of justice should not have before their eyes the fear of being harassed by suits for damages; the only penalty which they should incur if they give evidence falsely should be an indictment for perjury. No action for libel or slander was held to lie against Judges, counsel, witnesses, or parties, for words written or spoken in the course of any CS-2590/16 page 9 of 14 proceedings before any Court recognized by law even though the words were written or spoken maliciously, without any justification or excuse, and from personal­ill­ will and anger against the person defamed. It was emphasised that a witness must be protected for a preliminary statement as well. It was further held that though some hardship may be caused to the person defamed but it would be impossible to administer justice, if people were to be afraid to give their testimony. (f) Subsequently, in Anjana Saikia (Das) vs. Anuradha Das 2003, SCC OnLine Gau 321 it was held that though an action for defamation by statement in the FIR would lie but only after the FIR case was decided. Similarly, in Mahavir Singh vs Surinder Singh 2010 SCC OnLine P & H 9094 also it was held that mere lodging of the FIR, though it may contain false imputation, does not amount to defaming the person against whom FIR is lodged. To the same effect is Kamlesh kaur vs. Lakhwinder Singh 2008 SCC OnLine P & H 920. (g) A learned Single Judge of the High Court CS-2590/16 page 10 of 14 of Madras in A.N Shanmugam Vs. G. Saravanan 2015 SCC OnLine Mad 728 held the filing of a suit for defamation in such circumstances to be a process to escape from criminal prosecution and to make the defendant to come to terms. It was held that if every complaint who lodges the complaint with law enforcing agency is to face civil cases for defamation on the premise that the imputations made in the complaint according to the accused are false, many people fearing such actions on the part of the accused may not come forward to lodge a complaint to the law enforcing agency. It was further held that when an imputation has been made in a complaint made to the law enforcing agency with the belief that such agency would take criminal action against the persons against whom such imputations are made, the same provides a valid exception taking such act outside the scope of tort of defamation. It was held that the lodging of the complaint with the police could not be considered to be publication of a defamatory statement and that if any wrong is committed by CS-2590/16 page 11 of 14 lodging a false complaint with the police and thereby setting the criminal law in motion, it may amount to malicious prosecution for which action can be taken only after disposal of the criminal case, wherein a specific finding is given to that effect." 8. It is thus well settled that merely making a complaint to police authorities would not amount to defamation per se unless and until the FIR case was decided. Further more, the plaintiff even after expiry of period of limitatioin would have remedy to institute suit for damages for malicious prosecution or to get a case registered under Section 182 Cr.P.C but at this stage when the state case is still pending, the civil suit would be premature. 9. Plaintiffs have placed reliance upon pronouncement of Bikramjeet Ahluwalia (supra) where a petition seeking to quash a criminal complaint under Section 500 IPC alongwith summons issued pursuant thereto was dismissed on the ground that a prima face case was made out and that the defamatory content in statements under Section 161 CrP.C could be used for prosecution of an offence under Section 499 / 500 IPC. The ratio of Bikramjeet Ahluwalia was passed in completely different circumstances and pertains to the question of summoning of accused in a complaint under section 499 / 500 IPC and cannot be construed to imply that the CS-2590/16 page 12 of 14 plaintiffs have a cause of action to file the present suit or that the present suit is maintainable in the present form at this stage. To conclude, the impugned allegations were made by the defendant herein in a complaint to the police on basis of which FIR no. 342/16 under Section 498 A/406/354/328/377/506/323/34 IPC , PS GTB Enclave, Delhi has been registered which is pending trial. It is well settled that complaint to police authorities would not amount to defamation per se unless and until the FIR case was decided. In para 10 of the plaint plaintiff stated that due to above said false defamatory allegations, dignity and reputation of the plaintiff are being damaged in the society, therefore, prayed for mandatory injunction to stop defendant from publishing such type of allegations in future against the plaintiff. As discussed above, alleged defamatory allegations in the complaint/FIR can not be the basis of suit for damages until the complaint case/FIR case has been disposed off by the competent court. The prayer of the plaintiff to stop defendant from publishing alleged defamatory allegations in future against the plaintiffs, is not maintainable, in view of the fact that a court can not stop a person for availing/exercising his /her legal rights before the court of law. Hence, the prayer of mandatory injunction of the plaintiff is not maintainable. 10. In view of aforesaid discussions, the suit of the CS-2590/16 page 13 of 14 plaintiff is premature and is also without cause of action. Accordingly plaint is rejected u/o 7 Rule 11 (a) CPC . 11. Decree sheet be prepared. File be consigned to record room. (Dr. Hardeep Kaur) ADJ­02(SHD)/KKD/Delhi Digitally signed by HARDEEP HARDEEP KAUR KAUR Date: 2018.05.09 15:37:53 +0530 CS-2590/16 page 14 of 14