Veeranna C Charantimath vs Totappa S/O Malleshappa Hundekar on 25 September, 2012 Author: Jawad Rahim Bench: Jawad Rahim 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA CIRCUIT BENCH AT DHARWAD DATED THIS THE 25TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2012 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE JAWAD RAHIM CRL.P. NO.11191/2012 BETWEEN: VEERANNA C.CHARANTIMATH AGED 45 YEARS, OCC: BUSINESS AND MLA, R/O BAGALKOT TALUK, BAGALKOT. ... PETITIONER (BY SRI S.B.HEBBALI, ADV.) AND: TOTAPPA S/O MALLESHAPPA HUNDEKAR AGED 82 YEARS, OCC: TAX PRACTITIONER R/O BAGALKOT TALUK, DIST. BAGALKOT. ... RESPONDENT (BY SRI S.S.YADRAMI, ADV.) THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED U/S.482 OF CR.P.C. SEEKING TO QUASH THE ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS IN C.C.877/12 AGAINST PETITIONER ON THE FILE OF PRL.ADDL. JMFC COURT, BAGALKOT, AND DISMISS THE COMPLAINT. THIS PETITION COMING ON FOR ADMISSION THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING 2 ORDER Petitioner has called in question the proceedings before the JMFC, Bagalkot, in PCR.10/12 registered on the basis of a private complaint submitted by the respondent herein seeking prosecution of the petitioner for the offence punishable under Section 500, I.P.C. 2. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri S.B.Hebbali and Sri S.S.Yadrami, learned counsel representing the respondent. Perused records in supplementation thereto. It reveals: a) Respondent through his private complaint under Section 200 , Cr.P.C., invoked the jurisdiction of the trial court to try the petitioner for the offence under Section 499 , I.P.C. In support of it, he averred petitioner herein, acting as Chairman of Basaveshwar Veerashaiva Vidya Vardhak Sangha, Bagalkot, a society registered under the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act , published in JANASHRI media scandalous and defamatory statements about the activities 3 of the Sangha. It was carried by the T.V. channel which reported that public should be awareof its malfunctions. b) Thereafter, accused Sangha published a pamphlet on 7.1.2012 to protest telecast of the said news in JANASHRI. On that day, accused being Acting President of the Sangha and MLA, closed schools, colleges and also shops in Bagalkot, summoned persons to stage the protest. c) On the same day, he along with his followers, organized a procession from Shivanubhava Kalyan Mantap to Charanti Mangal Bhavan, which started at 10.00 a.m. till 2.00 p.m. The protest meeting was chaired by Mr.Kamble wherein the accused delivered defamatory speech at length using scandalous, vulgar words against the complainant and his father-Malleshappa (since deceased). The statement made by him referred to murder of his father and created a doubt on his paternity. d) The speech was recorded by the complainant. It was again telecast in the local channel on 8.1.2012. Complainant alleges accused did so with deliberate intention 4 as to demean and impeach the complainant in public esteem, to lower his dignity and impeach his character, conduct and even birth. e) On presentation of the complaint, cognizance was taken on 23.1.2012. Thereafter the sworn statement was recorded and by order dated 7.7.2012, petitioner has been summoned. f) Assailing the order and the proceedings, he is in this court, invoking Section 482 , Cr.P.C. to quash the proceedings. 3. In response to prior notice, respondent has entered appearance through learned counsel, Sri S.S.Yadrami. 4. I have already adverted to the substance of allegations in the complaint submitted by the respondent to initiate prosecution of the petitioner. Sri Hebbali would submit learned trial judge has committed a serious error in entertaining the complaint which otherwise is liable to be rejected in limine. The first ground canvassed is, without 5 taking cognizance, learned magistrate could not have passed the order summoning the petitioner. Secondly, it is contended the order impugned purports to be one under Section 202 , Cr.P.C., but the fact is, it is one passed under Section 204 , Cr.P.C. to summon the accused, and therefore, it is vitiated. Thirdly, no offence as defined under Section 499 , I.P.C. could be made out from the allegations in the complaint and hence, cognizance itself could not have been taken. 5. Comparing the averments in the complaint and the ingredients which constitute the offence under Section 499 , I.P.C., learned counsel submits the exercise will be a futility if the petitioner is put to trial as no conviction could be made on such a vague statement. 6. In negation of these grounds, learned counsel for the respondent supports the proceedings before the trial court and opposes this petition. 7. At the outset, we should keep in mind that the action is under Section 482 , Cr.P.C. and not under Section 397 , 6 Cr.P.C. The grounds of challenge are several, though the limit of consideration ion Section 482 , Cr.P.C. is limited. The first ground that cognizance was not taken by the magistrate must necessarily fail as the order sheet of the trial court on 23.1.2012 is very clear. It reads thus: 'Complainant present. Perused records. Cognizance taken. Register in PCR. For sworn statement by: 7.3.2012.' This meets the requirement of Section 200 , Cr.P.C. which postulates 'A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint shall examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present, if any, and the substance of such examination shall be reduced to writing and shall be signed by the complainant and the witnesses, and also by the Magistrate.' Thereafter the case has been posted to several dates and sworn statement has been recorded as evidenced from the entry in the order sheet dated 17.5.2012. Thereafter the learned judge has posted the case for production of other material evidence as could be seen from the entry in the order sheet dated 7.6.2012 and 14.6.2012. 7 This shows the magistrate has recorded the statement of witnesses and has received compact disc (CD) produced. 8. The procedure after taking cognizance is to apply Section 202 , Cr.P.C. which reads thus: 'Any Magistrate on receipt of a complaint of an offence which he is authorized to take cognizance or which has been made over to him under Section 192m, may, if he thinks fit, and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area n which he exercises his jurisdiction, postpone the issue of process against the accused, and either inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by any other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding: The proceedings before the trial court on 7.6.2012 and 14.6.2012 show the magistrate, after recording sworn statement, has posted it for inquiry, and as seen from the material available in the form of CD, it is the basis for investigation. The act of the magistrate in receiving material is in an inquiry under Section 202 , Cr.P.C. and till that time non-summoning of the accused is fully justified and is in consonance with the requirement of the provision. The final order passed on 7.7.2012 summons the petitioner. 8 But in the operative portion, the magistrate has quoted Section 202 which has been made much by the petitioner. 9. I have already referred to Section 202 , Cr.P.C. as it envisages. The order impugned passed on 7.7.2012 is a considered order taking into consideration the sworn statement and material in the CD. The operative portion of the order passed on 7.7.2012 reads thus: 'Acting under Sec.202 of Criminal Procedure Code, cognizance of offence punishable under Sec.500 of Indian Penal Code is taken against an accused. Office to register the criminal case against an accused and issue process to him on payment of P.F. by the complainant.' R/by 25.9.2012.' 10. The magistrate no doubt has quoted Section 202 , Cr.P.C., but it is quite evident the order falls within Section 204 , Cr.P.C. which reads thus: '204. Issue of process: (1) If in the opinion of a magistrate taking cognizance of an offence there is sufficient ground for proceeding, and the case appears to be-- (a) a summons case, he shall issue his summons for the attendance of the accused; or 9 (b) a warrant case, he may issue a warrant, or, if he thinks fit, a summons, for causing the accused to be brought or to appear at a certain time before such magistrate or if he has no jurisdiction himself, some other magistrate having jurisdiction. (2) No summons or warrant shall be issued against the accused under sub-section (1) until a list of the prosecution witnesses has been filed. (3) In a proceeding instituted upon a complaint made in writing, every summons or warrant issued under sub- sec.(1) shall be accompanied by a copy of such complaint. (4) When by any law for the time beingi n force any process fees or other fees are payable, no process shall be issued until fees are paid and, if such fees are not paid within a reasonable time, the magistrate may dismiss the complaint. (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the provisions of Section 87 . The operative portion referred to above clearly spells out the magistrate has expressed satisfaction and formed the opinion that the material placed before him makes out sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, and hence, has issued summons to him. Though the provision quoted is Section 202, the order falls within Section 204, Cr.P.C. I find no illegality in it. 10 11. The question is, whether the order could be termed as illegal merely because the complainant had not filed the list of witnesses. For this purpose, we have to examine the complaint itself whether he has cited any witness. It shows complainant has not cited any witness except himself. Had he cited anyone as witness and had failed to file such list, it could have been construed that issuance of process without furnishing the list of witnesses was improper. Since the complainant had no such intention, that requirement is dispensed with. 12. In this view, I find no illegality either in the order of the trial court or the proceedings. The petition stands dismissed. Sd/- JUDGE vgh*