Dr. Amitabh Bhasin vs Indian Express on 21 November, 2019 DLCT010005652008 IN THE COURT OF SH. SANJEEV KUMAR­I, ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE­12, TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI CS No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin, S/o Late Sh. R.L. Bhasin, R/o Plot No. 36, A­901, Rajasthan Co­operative Group Housing Society, Sector­4, Dwarka, New Delhi. .... Plaintiff. Versus 1. Indian Express, Through its Editor. 2. Sh. Amandeep Shukla, Reporter / Corespondent, Indian Express, New Delhi. ..... Defendants. Date of institution : 24.10.2008 Date of reserving Judgment : 18.09.2019 Date of decision : 21.11.2019 Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 1 of 28 SUIT FOR DAMAGES FOR DEFAMATION. JUDGMENT Vide this Judgment, I shall decide the suit for damages for defamation filed by the plaintiff against the defendants. 2. Brief facts as stated in the plaint are that the plaintiff is a Doctor and his brother was retired from the Air Force from the post of Air Commodore. He was posted as Doctor at Tihar Jail on 8.8.2006 and in the year 2007, he was working as Resident Medical Officer, Central Jail Hospital, Tihar. He came to know about the defamatory publication in Indian Express on its daily edition of 21.12.2007 under the caption (Tihar Doctor, Tihar Doc in dock for favouring terrorist). The said publication was false and defamatory due to which reputation of the plaintiff got tarnished. The plaintiff sent legal notice to the Editor of defendant asking to pay Rs. 20 lacs as compensation on account of said defamatory publication. In response to the said notice, defendant No. 1 sent a cryptic reply that they are not aware of the publication. In fact, they asked for the confirmation of the date about the publication. Therefore, he prays for passing a decree against defendants for a sum of Rs. 19,00,000/­ along with interest @ 12% per annum. 3. Summons of the suit were sent to the defendants. The Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 2 of 28 defendant No. 1 did not appear despite service and was proceeded ex­ parte vide order dated 13.4.2009. 4. The defendant No. 2 has contested the suit by filing written statement. In the written statement, the defendant No. 2 has stated that in the Court of Ld. District & Sessions Judge, a sessions case bearing SC No. 94/06, FIR 06/2006, PS - Special Cell under Section 121 / 121A / 122 / 123 / 120B IPC, 4/5, Explosive Substance Act, 25 Arms Act & 17/18/20/23 unlawful activities (P) Act titled as State Vs. Nasir Safi Mir was filed and said Nasir had sought bail on medical ground and report was called from the Jail Superintendent. The report from RMO i.e. the plaintiff was submitted to the Court by the Jail Superintendent bearing reference No. F3/SCJ3/AS(UT)/2007/1678. There were allegations that the RMO has misrepresented facts and favouritism in favour of Nasir Safir Mir. "An inquiry was entrusted to the Law Officer (Jail) who in his report has submitted that incorrect and exaggerated facts were placed before the court by the RMO in his report dated 25.7.2007 in respect of Nasir Safir Mir. The report of Dr. Narender Mohan was not sent to the court in collusion with vested interests which was found to be an unusual step. The Superintendent PHQ Sh. V.K. Malhotra vide letter dated 28.9.2007 bearing reference No. F10 PI 99/SJ/Legal/2007/2676 addressed to the court of Sh. K.S. Mohi, the then Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 3 of 28 Ld. ADJ pointed out the behavior of Resident Medical Officer which is as follows :­ "In this regard, I am directed to say that the report sent to this court was not based on documents and was prepared by the then Resident Medical Officer suppressing the earlier report sent by Dr. Narender Mohan addressed to the court. The report contained the following inaccuracies like it has been mentioned in the report, loss of sensation in the right lower limb, patient sent to AIIMS by directions of Sr. Resident Orthopedics. MRI to be done urgent and top priority, having severe anxiety, difficulty in walking and numbness in both lower limbs". The defendant sent the copy of correspondence and report at the time of preparation of the news report which appeared in The Indian Express in its 22.12.2007 edition. Subsequently, the defendant applied for copies of documents and information and copies of documents were provided to him under the RTI Act . While preparing the report, the defendant had called upon Sh. B.K. Gupta, Director General, Prison who is the senior most official at Tihar Jail and Sh. Gupta confirmed that in inquiry had been conducted against the plaintiff for favouritism towards an inmate. The defendant also learned that a similar news report was carried by another Delhi based newspaper in which Tihar Prison's PRO Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 4 of 28 Sunil Gupta is quoted after a reporter's question that "he received money for submitting an extravagant report to the court. Mir was admitted to the hospital without any disease". The plaintiff himself been quoted by Metro Now saying that "since Jail officials did not constitute a board and was hell bent on conducting an inquiry by law officials, I refused to co­operate". It is further averred that the charges against the plaintiff and the inquiry report are also referred to on a website : http://delhicrimewatch.blogspot.com/2008_02_24_archive.html. It is stated that in news published by the defendant, there is nothing which is contrary to what is stated in the letter dated 28.9.2007 bearing reference No. F10 PI 99/SJ/Legal/2007/2676 addressed to the court however, the plaintiff has not made the concerned official as party nor has challenged the veracity of what is contended in the said report. It is further stated that the defendant did contact the plaintiff for his version of the matter or his comments for publication but the plaintiff declined to say anything. The news report states that, "Newsline spoke to Dr. Bhasin at Sanjay Gandhi Hospital, but he refused to comment on the matter". The plaintiff admitted in notice dated 28.4.2008 sent through Advocate that his client got a memo dated 14.8.2007 and the same was replied by his client & later on his client got a letter dated 20.8.2007 signed Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 5 of 28 by law officer and his client was to appear before him as material witness and not as a charged officer in inquiry and after this letter there was no further correspondence. Thus the defendant prays for dismissal of the suit. 5. Plaintiff has filed replication in which he denied the contents of written statement as incorrect. He further stated that the terrorist prisoner sought bail on the ground this his mother was suffering from cancer and has to be operated. He was granted bail on the same grounds by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. The conduct of Narender Mohan was suspicious. He was the acting SMO on 25.7.2007 as the regular SMO Dr. J.P. Paliya was on leave. He had to make the report on that date however, he left the jail premises at around 2 pm without making the report and the plaintiff, the then RMO, his senior and their incharge in Central Jail Hospital had to call him from the home on his mobile only for the purpose of making the report. He came around 4 pm and he discussed the report with the RMO along with patient's case record. However, at around 5 pm, the plaintiff got a call from the office of the Jail Superintendent that the medical report of the prisoner has not been received in the office and non filing of the report would be a very serious matter. On inquiry by the plaintiff, he came to know that Dr. Narender Mohan had left the jail hospital premises as well as the jail premises. Attempts to contact him on his mobile were Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 6 of 28 futile as his mobile was switched off. Dr. Narender Mohan's "in" and "out" can be verified from the "in­out" register kept in every jail. The Doctor on duty also pleaded ignorance about making of report by the SMO. Looking into the seriousness of matter, the plaintiff, the then RMO called for the case records of the patient and made the report as per the findings in the case records and discussed by the said SMO. The plaintiff agreed that it was an unusual step and he was forced to take this unusual step on the ground of gravity of the situation as non­submission of report might have initiated contempt proceedings against him and other doctors also. Further, no such inquiry as alleged by the defendant was conducted against the plaintiff and no press release was given in this case. 6. Thereafter, the defendant filed additional written statement in which he denied the contents of the replication in which defendant has filed objections that no permission under Order 1 Rule 8 CPC has been obtained by the plaintiff to bring the suit as a class action suit on behalf of the legal profession. 7. On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the Ld. Predecessor has framed following issues vide order dated 9.12.2010 for consideration :­ 1. Whether the suit of the plaintiff is maintainable Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 7 of 28 against defendant No. 1? OPD. 2. Whether the suit is without cause of action? OPD. 3. Whether the suit is bad for non­joinder of necessary party? OPD. 4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree for a sum of Rs. 19,00,000/­ as prayed? OPP. 5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for any interest? If so, at what rate and for what amount? OPP. 6. Relief. 8. In order to prove his case, plaintiff has examined himself as PW1 who led his evidence by way of affidavit as Ex. PW1/A. He also examined SH. B.N. Mishra as PW2 and Dr. R.K. Chaubey as PW3. 9. On the other hand, defendant No. 2 has examined himself as DW1; Ms. Usha Arora, PIO, RTI Branch was examined as DW2 and Sh. Sunil Kumar, Retired Legal Advisor, Delhi Prisons, Tihar was examined as DW3. 10. Arguments heard on behalf of the parties as advanced by their respective counsels. 11. Ld. Counsel for the plaintiff has argued that the defendant No. 2 has published the news which is a defamatory news and since defendant Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 8 of 28 No. 2 has not denied the publication of the same and has also not able to prove that the said news is correct news therefore, the defendant No. 2 has committed offence and despite sending legal notice, defendant No. 2 did not tender any apology hence, liable to pay compensation as claimed by the plaintiff. 12. On the other hand, Ld. Counsel for the defendant has argued that the news is based on the facts taken from the record on various jail authorities hence, the said news was published in the good faith for the knowledge of the public and there was no intention to defame the plaintiff. Hence, in these circumstances, the plaintiff is not entitled to any compensation. Similar kind of suit for defamation was also filed against the other newspapers including Hindustan Times and the said suit was dismissed vide order dated 14.2.2014. 13. I have considered the submissions and have gone through the case file. My issuewise findings are as follows :­ 14. ISSUE NO. 1. Whether the suit of the plaintiff is maintainable against defendant No. 1? OPD. The onus to prove this issue was placed upon the defendants as defendant no.2 in WS has taken preliminary objection that suit is not Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 9 of 28 maintainable as defendant no.1 designation is mentioned i.e.Indian Express through its editor which does not exist. The Indian Express is multi Edition newspaper therefore it is not possible to determine which editor is being referred, the editor of a newpapor is not a legal entity. On perusal of summons sent to defendant no.1 it is evident that same has been sent to The Editior Indian Express, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, Delhi, hence from the summons itself it is evident that in memo of parties no specific editor was mention but there was no confusion that it pertain to Delhi Edition of Indian Express that is why summon were issued to Editor of Delhi Edition. Hence I do not find force that its is not clear about which edition editor was made defendant no.1. As far as submission that Editor is not a juristic person. In my view since Editor is responsible for publication of a new item in the newspaper therefore he is responsible not in his individual capacity but being editor. Hence the editor of a newspaper can be impleaded as party. As stated above, the defendant No. 1 has not filed any written statement as it was proceeded ex­parte whereas defendant No. 2 neither in his testimony of DW1 has stated anything that the suit is not maintainable against defendant no.1 hence I held the defendants have failed to prove that the suit is not maintainable against defendant No. 1. 15. On the other hand, plaintiff has categorically deposed in his Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 10 of 28 testimony that the news item "Tihar Doctor, Tihar Doc in dock for favouring terrorist" was published in its edition dated 21.12.2007. This fact has not been denied by the defendant No. 2 neither there is any suggestion to the PW1 in his cross examination that no such news item was published. In these circumstances, in my view when a news has been published by Editor of the newspaper which he found defamatory then he will be responsible for publication of the said news hence, I held that the suit is maintainable against the defendant No. 1. Issue No. 1 is decided accordingly in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants. ISSUE NO. 3. Whether the suit is bad for non­joinder of necessary party? OPD. 16. The onus to prove this issue was placed upon the defendants. The defendants in the written statement has stated that the news is based upon the report of law officers of jail and the letter dated 28.9.2007 from the Superintendent PHQ Sh. V.K. Malhotra and confirmation from Director General Sh. B.K. Gupta however, the plaintiff has failed to implead them as defendants. 17. PW1 has categorically deposed in his testimony that he has filed the suit against Sh. B.K. Gupta which is pending in the court of Sh. Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 11 of 28 Digvijay Singh, Ld. ADJ, Tis Hazari Courts. No suggestion has been given to the plaintiff that he has not filed suit against Sh. B.K. Gupta. Hence, in these circumstances, in my view when the plaintiff has already filed suit against Sh. B.K. Gupta, there was no requirement to implead him as defendant in the present suit. Furthermore, in my view cause of action qua the defendant and Sh. B.K. Gupta and Sh. Sunil Kumar, Law Officer are different. The suit has been filed by the plaintiff against the defendant only on the ground that he has published false news regarding plaintiff's favouring terrorist and independent cause of action and has no concern with Sh. B.K. Gupta, the then Director General Prison and Sh. Sunil Kumar, Law Officer even if I presume that the defendant has published the news on the basis of information given by them, hence in view of the aforesaid facts, even if the plaintiff has not impleaded Sh. B.K. Gupta and Sh. Sunil Kumar Gupta on whose report the defendants have published the news, suit will not be bad for non­joinder as it is the plaintiff's prerogative as against whom he choose to initiate suit for defamation being master of the suit. Therefore, issues No. 2 and 3 are decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants. ISSUES NO. 2 & 4. Whether the suit is without cause of action? OPD; AND Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 12 of 28 Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree for a sum of Rs. 19,00,000/­ as prayed? OPP. 18. The onus to prove these issues was placed upon the defendant and plaintiff respectively. In order to prove the same, plaintiff has examined himself as PW1. PW1 has tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW1/A in which he has almost repeated the same contents as stated by him in the plaint. Therefore, same are not repeated here. In his cross examination, he has stated that he is MBBS and having Diploma in Medical Radiotherapy from Maulana Azad Medical College, Delhi. He is the senior most official of Central Jail, Tihar being RMO. RMO reported the Director General, Prisoner Sh. B.K. Gupta. He has filed defamation suit against Sh. B.K. Gupta. In his examination also he has stated that he has filed the suit against Sh. B.K. Gupta which is pending in the court of Sh. Digvijay Singh, Ld. ADJ, Tis Hazari Courts. No suggestion has been given to the plaintiff that he has not filed the suit against Sh. B.K. Gupta. He further deposed that he had received a telephone call from the reporter Amandeep Shukla, defendant No. 2 but he did not meet him personally before publication of the news item. He admitted that he has not filed any complaint to Press Council regarding said news item. He admitted that the memo dated 14.8.2007 was issued against him by the Central Jail Tihar. No Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 13 of 28 inquiry was conducted at Tihar Jail in respect of any medical report given by Tihar Jail Doctors in respect of accused under Trial Nasir Safi Mir. He admitted that he sent a medical report in the court of Sh. K.S. Mohi, Ld. ASJ. The said report is Ex. PW1/1D which bears his signatures at point A. He deposed that he was not aware whether Tihar Jail Authorities had written to Delhi Government pointing out his medical report was wrong or not. He stated that he cannot say that signatures on document Mark A at point A are of Dr. Narender Mohan or not. He stated that he will not read Mark A unless the certified copy of the same is placed before him. He admitted that Nasir Safi Mir was recommended to be examined at AIIMS and over there he was advised for nerve conduction velocity test, Electro Myelogram Test and MRI. He admitted that he was transferred to Sanjay Gandhi Hospital. He is not aware whether any report was sent by the office of D.G. to the court of Ld. ASJ Sh. K.S. Mohi or not. It is in his knowledge that Sh. B.K. Gupta had made a statement against his conduct. He admitted that there is no enmity between him and Indian Express or defendant No. 2. He admitted that prior to publication of news Sh. Amandeep Shukla had telephoned him and at that time, he was working as HOD (Radiology) in Sanjay Gandhi Hospital. He admitted that similar articles were published in two or three publications. Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 14 of 28 19. PW2 Dr. B.N. Mishra in his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. PW2/A has deposed that he was working as Medical Officer at DDU Hospital at the time of publication of news item in Indian Express dated 22.12.2007 titled "Tihar doc in the dock for favouring terrorist". The plaintiff is a close friend of him. Plaintiff was never chargesheeted and as such no inquiry was against him. In his cross examination, he stated that he knows the plaintiff since 2000 and deposed at request of the plaintiff being his friend. 20. PW3 Dr. R.K. Chaubey has deposed through his evidence by way of affidavit Ex. P­3 that he was working in Central Jail, Tihar as Medical Officer on the day of publication of said news item on 22.12.2007. He is a close friend of the plaintiff and knows that the plaintiff is very honest, sincere and dedicated person to his duties and has never been chargesheeted and as such no inquiry has been held against him. In his cross examination, he stated that he came to depose in evidence being close friend of plaintiff. 21. DW1 in his testimony has deposed that the report is based on on the inquiry report of Sh. Sunil Kumar, Law Officer (Jails) and the inquiry officer as per the directions of D.G. (Prisons) vide its order No. PS/DG/ (P)2007/434 dated 16.8.2007 and subsequent press briefing by the then Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 15 of 28 Director General, Sh. B.K. Gupta. The conclusion of the report indicts the plaintiff which states that the patient prisoner Nasir Mir, son of Md. Sakil Safi Mir was unjustifiably kept admitted in the hospital for almost more than two months at the instance of RMO Dr. Amitabh Bhasin i.e. the plaintiff who exerted his undue influence in getting the prisoner admitted in jail hospital despite protest by the other subordinate doctors and against the advice of S.R. Ortho who being specialist was authority to admit or discharge a prisoner in Ortho / surgery ward. It was also conducted in inquiry report that incorrect and exaggerated facts were placed before the court in the report dated 25.6.2007 in respect of the said prisoner. 22. In his cross­examination, he has stated that the primary basis of information for publication of report was the letter written by the Tihar Authorities to Sh. K.S. Mohi, the then Ld. ASJ the contents of which are known to him. Whereas in his testimony of DW1 has stated that the news report is based on the inquiry report of Sh. Sunil Kumar, Law Officer (Jails) and the inquiry officer as per the directions of D.G. (Prisons) vide its order No. PS/DG/(P)2007/434 dated 16.8.2007 and subsequent press briefing by the then Director General, Sh. B.K. Gupta and in reply to the same, in their application the plaintiff has stated that he got reply under the RTI. 23. It is argued by the counsel for the plaintiff that from the Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 16 of 28 testimony of plaintiff it is proved that plaintiff was posted as a Doctor in Tihar Jail and false report was published by the defendant No. 1 in its newspaper "Indian Express" with the title "Tihar Doc in dock for favouring terrorist" which has tarnished the reputation of the plaintiff in the eyes of society as well as in the eyes of family and friends and relatives. The defendant has published the said news without verifying the facts from the plaintiff hence, the defendant caused loss to reputation of the plaintiff and thus, liable to pay damages as claimed by the defendant. 24. On the other hand, counsel for the defendant has argued that from the testimony of DW1, it is evident that the news articles were published on the basis of inquiry report of Sh. Sunil Kumar, Law Officer of Jail and conclusion of the report was that the patient / prisoner Nasir Mir was unjustifiably admitted in the hospital for almost two months at the instance of the plaintiff hence, report of the defendant was not baseless and was published in good faith to give knowledge to the public at large which is the job of a free and fair press hence, defendants have not committed any defamation of the plaintiff initially therefore, there is no merit in the suit and the same is liable to be dismissed. He further argued that the said news was also published by other newspapers and the plaintiff has filed suit No. 540/08 against the newspaper, "Hindustan Times" almost on the similar Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 17 of 28 grounds for damages and the said suit was dismissed by the court of Sh. Raj Kumar, the then Ld. ADJ, Central vide Judgment dated 14.2.2014 and thus, in these circumstances, there is no merit in the suit of the plaintiff and the same is liable to be dismissed. 25. The plaintiff has deposed that the defendant has made defamatory publication in "Indian Express" newspaper dated 22.12.2007 titled as "Tihar Doc in dock for favouring terrorist" but the plaintiff has not prove the said news article in his evidence. However newpaper dated 22.12.2017 is on judicial file which contain article with caption "Tihar doc in dock for favouring terreriost" in its third page. Since defendant no.2 has not denied the publication of said article hence, I am not agree with the contention of Ld. Counsel for defendant that suit is liable to dismiss on the ground that newpaper containing alleged defamatory allegation has not been exhibited in evidence. 26. Since the suit has been filed by the plaintiff for damages on the ground of committing defamation by the defendants by publishing news item which according to him caused loss of reputation therefore, it would be appropriate to seek what is the defamation. There is no definition of defamation in any civil law but in Section 499 of Indian Penal Code, the definition of defamation has been provided along with its exceptions. Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 18 of 28 Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code is reproduced as under :­ "499. Defamation.--Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1.--It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.--It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.--An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.--No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 19 of 28 Illustrations (a) A says--"Z is an honest man; he never stole B's watch"; intending to cause it to be believed that Z did steal B's watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. (b) A is asked who stole B's watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z stole B's watch. This is defamation unless it fall within one of the exceptions. (c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B's watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole B's watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. First Exception.--Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published.--It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact. Second Exception.--Public conduct of public servants.--It is not defamation to express in a good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Third Exception.--Conduct of any person touching any public question.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 20 of 28 person touching any public question, and respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Illustration It is not defamation in A to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting Z's conduct in petitioning Government on a public question, in signing a requisition for a meeting on a public question, in presiding or attending a such meeting, in forming or joining any society which invites the public support, in voting or canvassing for a particular candidate for any situation in the efficient discharges of the duties of which the public is interested. Fourth Exception.--Publication of reports of proceedings of Courts.--It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such proceedings. Explanation.--A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an inquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of the above section. Fifth Exception.--Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others concerned.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 21 of 28 Illustrations (a) A says--"I think Z's evidence on that trial is so contradic­ tory that he must be stupid or dishonest". A is within this exception if he says this is in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he expresses respects Z's character as it appears in Z's conduct as a witness, and no further. (b) But if A says--"I do not believe what Z asserted at that trial because I know him to be a man without veracity"; A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which he express of Z's character, is an opinion not founded on Z's conduct as a witness. Sixth Exception.--Merits of public performance.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his character appears in such performance, and no further. Explanation.--A performance may be substituted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public. Illustrations (a) A person who publishes a book, submits that book to the judgment of the public. (b) A person who makes a speech in public, submits that speech to the judgment of the public. (c) An actor or singer who appears on a public stage, submits his acting or signing in the judgment of the public. Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 22 of 28 (d) A says of a book published by Z--"Z's book is foolish; Z must be a weak man. Z's book is indecent; Z must be a man of impure mind". A is within the exception, if he says this in good faith, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z respects Z's character only so far as it appears in Z's book, and no further. (e) But if A says--"I am not surprised that Z's book is foolish and indecent, for he is a weak man and a libertine". A is not within this exception, in as much as the opinion which he expresses of Z's character is an opinion not founded on Z's book. Seventh Exception.--Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful authority over another.--It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by law or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates. Illustration A Judge censuring in good faith the conduct of a witness, or of an officer of the Court; a head of a department censuring in good faith those who are under his orders; a parent censuring in good faith a child in the presence of other children; a school­master, whose authority is derived from a parent, censuring in good faith a pupil in the presence of other pupils; a master censuring a servant in good faith for remissness in service; a banker censuring in good faith the cashier of his bank for the Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 23 of 28 conduct of such cashier as such cashier--are within this exception. Eighth Exception.--Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person.--It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject­matter of accusation. Illustration If A in good faith accuse Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a servant, to Z's master; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, and child, to Z's father--A is within this exception. Ninth Exception.--Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's interests.--It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good. Illustrations (a) A, a shopkeeper, says to B, who manages his business --"Sell nothing to Z unless he pays you ready money, for I have no opinion of his honesty". A is within the exception, if he has made this imputation on Z in good faith for the protection of his own interests. (b) A, a Magistrate, in making a report of his own superior officer, casts an imputation on the character of Z. Here, if Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 24 of 28 the imputation is made in good faith, and for the public good, A is within the exception. Tenth Exception.--Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good.--It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another, provided that such caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good". 27. Though provisions of IPC cannot be applied in civil cases but in my view the definition of defamation and exceptions as mentioned above can be used to determine what is defamation. As deposed by DW1 Sh. Amandeep Shukla, the alleged defamtory news article dated 22.12.2007 is based upon the inquiry report of Sh. Sunil Kumar, Law Officer (Jail) done as per directions of Director General vide its order No. PS/DG/(P)2007/434 dated 16.8.2007 and subsequent press briefing by the then Director General, Sh. B.K. Gupta. In his cross examination also, in response to answer as to what was the source of information on which the publication was made, DW1 deposed that he has attached documents which include communication sent by the competent authority of Tihar Jail to the court of Sh. K.S. Mohi and then cross checked the facts with the then Director Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 25 of 28 General Sh. B.K. Gupta about which he mentioned in the report and a copy of inquiry report about the said matter which was conducted by Sh. Sunil Kumar has also been attached. He also deposed that he tried to spoke to Sh. Amitabh Bhasin for his version on phone. No suggestion has been given to the witness that the documents as stated by the witness i.e. communication sent by competent authority of Tihar Jail and the inquiry report do not indict the plaintiff. Hence, it cannot be said that publication of abovesaid news article is not based on any material and was published without any basis. 28. On perusal of inquiry report which is part of Ex. DW1/1, I found that in the said report, it is mentioned that the prisoner Nasir Mir was unjustifiably kept admitted in the hospital for almost more than two months at the instance of RMO Dr. Amitabh Bhasin i.e. the plaintiff who exerted his undue influence in getting the prisoner admitted in jail hospital despite protest by the other subordinate doctors and against the advice of S.R. Ortho who being specialist was authority to admit or discharge a prisoner in Ortho / surgery ward. Thus, from the inquiry report, it is evident that the plaintiff has been indicted in favouring prisoner Nasir Mir. Hence, in these circumstances, on the basis of inquiry report, it cannot be said to be without any basis. Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 26 of 28 29. I am fully agree with the contention of Ld. Counsel for the defendants that it is the duty of a reporter / newspaper to bring to the knowledge of the public the information / input which are for public goods. The plaintiff admittedly was a public servant and was holding a responsible post and if any wrong was found committed by him certainly it is duty of defendants being Editor and reporter to bring the same into the knowledge of Public. The alleged defamatory news article is merely extract of the material on public domain. The DW1 has categorically deposed in the cross examination that he has contacted to the plaintiff to know his side of story. No suggestion has been given to DW1 that he deliberately or malafidely did not publish his side of storey. In my view the new item publish by defendants was not without any just and reasonable cause and since same was based on public document, it is covered in exceptions 1, 3 and 4 of Section 499 IPC. 30. In view of above discussion, I held that the defendant has been able to prove that the abovesaid news article was published in good faith for public good and the plaintiff has failed to prove that the same was published with malacious intention. Therefore, no defamation has been committed by the defendants by publishing the abovesaid news article hence the suit filed by the plaintiff is without cause of action and no case of Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 27 of 28 causing defamation is made out against defendants which make plaintiff entitle for grant of any compensation much less Rs. 19 Lakh, therefore, I decide both issues No. 2 and 4 in favour of the defendants and against the plaintiff. 31. ISSUE NO. 5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for any interest? If so, at what rate and for what amount? OPP. In view of my findings that the plaintiff is not entitled for any damages/ compensation, no question of grant of any interest arise. Issue No. 5 is decided accordingly against the plaintiff. 32. RELIEF. In view of my findings on the issues no. 2,4 and 5, I held that the plaintiff is not entitled to any relief. The suit is hereby dismissed with cost. Decree sheet be prepared accordingly. File be consigned to record room after necessary compliance. Announced in the open court (Sanjeev Kumar­I) on 21.11.2019 Additional District Judge­12, Central Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi 21.11.2019 Digitally signed by SANJEEV SANJEEV KUMAR KUMAR Date: 2019.11.21 13:18:21 +0530 Suit No. 15731/16 Dr. Amitabh Bhasin Vs. Indian Express & Anr. Page No. 28 of 28