Dr. D.K. Seth vs Dr. Durga Prasad Ray on 7 August, 2013 IN THE COURT OF MS. SAVITA RAO, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE­02, CENTRAL, DELHI Crl. Revision No. : 92/2013 CC No. : 1161/1/12 P.S. : Subzi Mandi U/s : 500 IPC Case ID No. : 02401R0205442013 IN THE MATTER OF :­ Dr. D.K. Seth S/o Sh. Kesho Ram Seth R/o 171, Narmada Apartments, Alaknanda, New Delhi ................Petitioner Vs. Dr. Durga Prasad Ray S/o Sh. N.K. Ray R/o 49/5, Bulglow Road, Kamla Nagar, Delhi .............Respondent Date of Institution : 27.04.2013 Date of Arguments : 07.08.2013 Date of Order : 07.08.2013 ORDER 1. This is a revision petition filed on behalf of petitioner aggrieved by the order of Ld. Trial court dated 22.1.2013 whereby the petitioner was summoned on the allegations u/s 500 IPC. 2. Complainant had filed a complaint before Ld. Trial court u/s 200 Cr.P.C. based upon the allegations that he was working as CMO at Hindu Rao Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 1/10 Hospital where the petitioner was also working as Doctor. There was some previous litigation between the complainant and his employer i.e. MCD where the complainant succeeded due to which his senior colleagues were annoyed including the petitioner herein and consequently they started harassing him . Accused/petitioner wrote a letter to the medical superintendent Hindu Rao Hospital in which he contended that " on the basis of his professional experience, he strongly suspected that the complainant suffered from a mental disorder perhaps paranoid delusions, therefore he suggested that administration should take his history into account as keeping his mental health in mind and refer him or get his treatment from a good psychiatrist which will go long way to help both him and Hindu Rao Hospital fraternity". Advance copy of the said letter was also sent to Additional Commissioner (H) for the needful upon which noting was made by the Additional Commissioner (H) that the assessment of complainant be got done from the board of psychiatrists of AIIMS and IHBAS which was followed by several other notings made by different officials. 3. The complainant examined himself in pre­summoning evidence and based upon the material available on record, Ld. Trial court observed that the communication did not remain within the knowledge of only two persons but had been extensively circulated. It was observed that the noting purportedly made by Additional Commissioner shows that the imputations were taken seriously by the hospital administration to the extent of recommending the complainant to AIIMS/ IHBAS . It was further observed that several notings on the communication established that it was circulated and the complainant deposed on oath that his reputation had been lowered in the eyes of doctors, clerks, staff, patient and general public and accordingly summoning order was Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 2/10 passed against the petitioner/accused. 4. Challenge to the impugned order has been made on behalf of petitioner mainly on the ground of requirement of sanction u/s 197 Cr.P.C. as well as u/s 477 of DMC Act and it was submitted that the bonafide comments were given by the petitioner in discharge of his official duties in good faith which were intended for the good of the respondent/complainant which case is also covered under the exception 8 of sec. 499 IPC. 5. In terms of record, complainant had written many complaints to Medical Superintendent, Hindu Rao Hospital regarding the conduct of petitioner/accused herein wherein the allegations were leveled against the petitioner with respect to use of obscene expressions from his eyes, threatenings and also the obscene comments with respect to the family of respondent/complainant. In one of the complaints, it was also alleged by the complainant that on 13.4.2012, petitioner met the complainant in parking area at about 4 p.m. and used obscene expression from the eyes besides telling him in low pitch of voice that his wife was not residing with him and they could enjoy themselves. Accordingly the comments of petitioner herein were called wherein he denied the contents of the complaint with mention that the respondent made such allegations whenever it was time to write his ACR with further remark with respect to the requirement for reference of respondent to Psychiatrist for his treatment, based upon which comments the complaint was lodged by the complainant. Advance copy of the said comments was also sent to Additional Commissioner (H) for the needful upon which noting was made by the MS followed by many more notings by the other officials concerned. It may be noted that the petitioner himself did not write nor circulated any Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 3/10 complaint or remarks against the respondent which was only mentioned in the comments sought from him in the official capacity. The subsequent act of MS in making the noting who in his wisdom decided to forward it to the other officials concerned cannot be attributed to the petitioner herein nor can be considered the circulation of the defamatory reference against the respondent. 6. It was argued by Ld. Counsel for respondent that scope of revision is limited and the court in revisional jurisdiction cannot see the documents or appreciate the evidence since powers of the revisional court are confined only to the extent of finding infirmity or illegality in the order passed by Ld. Trial court, however at the same time admits that the documentary or the other evidence based upon which the impugned order has been passed is the part of record which is required to be seen to come to the conclusion with respect to the infirmity or illegality in the order of Ld. Trial court. 7. In terms of own case of complainant, petitioner was working as Doctor and was a public servant within the meaning of definition provided under Cr.P.C . ,whereas the respondent was also aware of the requirement of sanction in such like cases but according to him in the instant matter, the sanction was not required since the act of petitioner was not officially required nor it was necessary and statutory in the performance of his duties to write such uncalled for comments. However as already observed, the alleged imputation which was made by the petitioner herein was in response to the letter issued by the competent authority seeking for the comments of the petitioner and as argued by Ld. Counsel for petitioner the said act is covered under exception 8 to section 499 IPC whereby it is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 4/10 authority over that person with respect to the subject matter of accusation. The comments in the instant matter apparently, in terms of own case of complainant, were submitted before the person who had lawful authority over the complainant with respect to subject matter since the complaints were filed by the complainant before the same authority upon which the comments were called. Reliance is placed upon 1999 ( 1) JCC (SC) 140 Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande & Ors. Vs. Uttam & Anr. wherein report was made by the accused persons against the complainant based upon which departmental inquiry had been initiated . It was held that " the fact that accused persons had made report to the superior officer of the complainant would be covered by exception (8) to section 499 IPC ". 8. It was the further contention of Ld. Counsel for respondent that at the time of taking cognizance and summoning of accused, trial court was not legally bound to go through the requirement of sanction and for the abovesaid he placed reliance upon Matajog Dubey Vs. H.C. Bhari 1956 AIR 44 wherein it was observed that " the need for sanction under section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is not necessarily to be considered as soon as the complaint is lodged and on the allegations therein contained. The question may arise at any stage of the proceedings. The complaint may not disclose that the act constituting the offence was done or purported to be done in the discharge of official duty; but fact subsequently coming to light on a police or judicial inquiry, or even in the course of the prosecution evidence at the trial, may establish, the necessity for sanction. Whether sanction is necessary or not may have to be determined from stage to stage. The necessity may reveal itself in the course of the progress of case ". Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 5/10 9. Ld. Counsel for respondent also placed reliance upon A.K. Subbaiah & Ors. Vs. State of Karnataka & Ors. 1987 SCR (3)1128, Lalu Prasad @ Lala Prasad Yadav Vs. State of Bihar Crl. Appeal No. 1276 of 2006 , State of H.P. Vs. M.P. Gupta Crl. Appeal No. 339 of 1997 and P. Seshagiri Rao And & Anr. Vs. K. Pattabhiraman & Anr. Criminal Petition no. 2964 of 2000 wherein interalia it was observed that " the protection given under section 197 is to protect responsible public servants against the institution of possibly vexatious criminal proceedings for offences alleged to have been committed by them while they are acting or purporting to act as public servants. The policy of the legislature is to afford adequate protection to public servants to ensure that they are not prosecuted for anything done by them in discharge of their official duties without reasonable cause, and if sanction is granted, to confer on the government, if they choose to exercise it, complete control of the prosecution. This protection has certain limits and is available only when the alleged act done by the public servant is reasonable connected with the discharge of his official duty and it is not merely a cloak for doing the objectionable act. If in doing his official duty, he acted in excess of his duty, but there is reasonable connection between the act and the performance of the official duty, the excess will not be a sufficient ground to deprive the public servant from the protection. The question is not as to the nature of the offence such as whether the alleged offence contained an element necessarily dependent upon the offender being a public servant, but whether it was committed by a public servant acting or purporting to act as such in the discharge of his official capacity. Before section 197 can be invoked, it must be shown that the official concerned was accused of an offence alleged to have Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 6/10 been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties. It is not the duty which requires examination so much as the act, because the official act can be performed both in the discharge of the official duty as well as in dereliction of it. The act must fall within the scope and range of the official duties of the public servant concerned, it is the quality of the act which is important and the protection of this section is available if the act falls within the scope and range of his official duty. There cannot be any universal rule to determine whether there is reasonable connection between the act done and the official duty, nor is it possible to lay down any such rule. One safe and sure test in this regard would be to consider if the omission or neglect on the part of the public servant to commit the act complained of could have made him answerable for a charge of dereliction of his duty, if the answer to his question is in the affirmative, it may be said that such act was committed by the public servant while acting in the discharge of his official duty and there was every connection with the act complained of and the official duty of the public servant. This aspect makes it clear that the concept of section 197 does not get immediately attracted on institution of the complaint case ". 10. There cannot be any dispute with the legal propositions of law as laid down in the abovesaid authorities, however in the instant matter, complainant/respondent was aware of the necessity of the sanction, though stated that it was not required since the act purported to be done by the petitioner/accused was not in discharge of his official functions. In these circumstances the complainant/respondent once being aware of the requirement of sanction, it was necessary for the trial court to go into the factum of requirement, if any, of sanction prior to summoning of the accused/respondent. Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 7/10 11. Perusal of record reveals that the basic requirement of section 499 IPC that the reputation of the respondent had been lowered down in the eyes of public itself is not proved because of non examination of other witnesses from the complainant side in whose estimation the reputation of complainant had been lowered down. Though this court appreciates that the requirement for examination of any such witness may be dispensed with where the contents disclose the allegations of defemation per­se, however at the cost of repetition, it may be stated that since it was in response to the complaint wherein the complainant himself had leveled the allegations against the petitioner to the extent that he was told by petitioner that his wife was not residing with him and they could enjoy themselves , and upon calling of the comments by the MS of Hindu Rao Hospital that the petitioner/accused furnished his comments alongwith the alleged imputation. It was submitted by Ld. Counsel for petitioner that though it may be the case that the imputations made by the complainant himself was wrong and unwarranted , therefore in retaliation and in good faith, the alleged remarks were passed by petitioner and if the complainant himself claims the immunity with respect to leveling of unwarranted remarks against the petitioner, on the same footing, the act of the petitioner also needs to be termed as the one during discharge of his official duties while furnishing the reply of the complaints of complainant lodged before the authority concerned, hence, sanction u/s 197 Cr.P.C. as well as u/s 477 of DMC Act as contended by Ld. Counsel for petitioner was also required. 12. For the abovesaid, reliance is placed upon R.N. Goel Vs. Nirmal Goel Crl. M.C. No. 3033/2007 wherein the petitioner had written impugned letter to the Chief Engineer when he felt that he was being unnecessarily Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 8/10 pressurized by the respondent/complainant to expedite the hearing before the arbitrator which was detrimental to the interest of government, it was observed that the petitioner thereby discharged his official duties by informing the conduct of the respondent to his controlling authority. The act of the petitioner was held to be in exercise of his official duties or purported to be done in exercise of his official duties, therefore he was held entitled to protection u/s 197 of Cr.P.C. and it was concluded that no complaint could have been lodged against him without the previous sanction of the Central Government. 13. Reliance is also placed upon Sankaran Moitra Vs. Sadhna Das & Anr. Appeal (Crl .) no. 330 of 2006 wherein it was observed that " an offence seldom consists of single act. It is usually composed of several elements and, as a rule, a whole series of acts must be proved before it can be established. In the present case, the elements alleged against the second accused are, first, that there was an "entrustment" and/or "dominion"; second, that the entrustment and/or dominion was " in his capacity as public servant"; third, that there was a "disposal"; and fourth, that the disposal was "dishonest". Now it is evident that the entrustment and/or dominion here were in an official capacity, and it is equally evident that there could in this case be no disposal, lawful or otherwise, save by an act done or purporting to be done in an official capacity. Therefore, the act complained of, namely the disposal, could not have been done in any other way. If if was innocent, it was an official act; if dishonest, it was the dishonest doing of an official act, but in either event the act was official because the second accused could not dispose of the goods save by the doing of an official act, namely, officially permitting their disposal; and that he did. He actually permitted their release and purported to do it in an official capacity, Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 9/10 and apart from the fact that he did not pretend to act privately, there was no other way in which he could have done it. Therefore, whatever the intention or motive behind the act may have been, the physical part of it remained unaltered, so if it was official in the one case, it was equally official in the other, and the only different would lie in the intention with which it was done ; in the one even, it would be done in the discharge of an official duty and in the other, in the purported discharge of it ". It was further observed that " the offence alleged to have been committed must have something to do, or must be related in some manner, with the discharge of official duty. No question of sanction can arise under section 197 , unless the act complained of is an offence; the only point to determine is whether it was committed in the discharge of official duty. There must be reasonable connection between the act and the official duty. It does not matter even if the act exceeds what is strictly necessary for the discharge of the duty, as this question will arise only at a later stage when the trial proceeds on the merit. What we must find out is whether the act and the official duty are so inter­related that one can postulate reasonably that it was done by the accused in the performance of the official duty, though possibly in excess of the needs and requirements of the situation ". 14. In view of the discussion made herein above, impugned order dated 22.1.2013 qua summoning of the petitioner is set aside. Present revision petition is accordingly allowed. TCR alongwith copy of order be sent back to the trial court. Revision file be consigned to record room. (SAVITA RAO) Additional Sessions Judge­02 (Central) Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi Announced in the open court today i.e. on 07.08.2013 Crl. Rev. No.: 92/2013 10/10