The General Clauses Act LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA SIXTIETH REPORT ON THE GENERAL CLAUSES ACT, 1897 MAY, 1974 GOVERNMENT OF INDIA MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE & COMPANY AFFAIRS Chapter 1 Chapter 2 Chapter 3 Chapter 4 Chapter 5 Chapter 6 Chapter 7 Chapter 8 Chapter 9 Chapter 10 Chapter 11 Chapter 12 Chapter 13 Chapter 14 Chapter 15 Appendix CONTENTS Preliminary Statutory Interpretation Deﬁnitions Commencement Part of Statutes Repeal and Amendment Temporary Acts Other General Rules of Construction Corporations Provisions concerning the Government Powers and Functionaries Statutory Instruments Severability Offences under Several Enactments Miscellaneous Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendments to the existing Act 14 30 36 41 48 55 62 69 72 84 88 96 100 4: D.O. No. F. 1(1)/73--L.C. P. B. Gajendragadkar LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA 'A' Wing, Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi--1. May 21, 1974. I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the 60th Report of the Commission on the General Clauses Act, As the Commission has pointed out in the ﬁrst Chapter of the Report, a draft Report on the subject, containing tentative proposals, had been prepared by the previous Commission and circulated for comments to State Governments, High Courts, Bar Associations and other inter- ested persons and bodies. Replies had been received in response to the said draft; but, no fur- ther action was taken by the previous Commission and no report submitted in that behalf. As you are aware, after the present Commission was constituted, it was engaged in dealing with more urgent work and when that work was completed, it decided to take up the present subject for study. A fresh draft Report on the subject was then prepared by the Member- Secretary, Mr. Bakshi for discussion. This draft was fully considered by the Commission and in the light of the discussion, it was revised and ultimately ﬁnalised. While doing so, the comments received on the earlier draft have been duly taken into account. The Commission hopes that the recommendations made in the present Report would help rationalise some of its important sections and clarify the law by removing ambiguities where they existed and recommending the addition of certain new sections. Yours Sd/- P. B. GAJENDRAGADKAR Hon'b1e Mr. H. R. Gokhale, Minister of Law, Justice & Co. Affairs, Government of India, New Delhi. CHAPTER 1 PRELIMINARY 1.1. This Report deals with an enactment which is not conﬁned to a particular branch of the law, but applies to all its branches. It is concerned with the General Clauses Act, 1897 . 1-2. Revision of the General Clauses Act was referred to a previous Law Commission in 1959 by the Ministry of Law' (Legislative Department). The Commission commenced a study of the subject. and had to consider one important preliminary question" relating to the effect of revision of the Act on the operation of article 367(1) of the Constitution- This question was, after considerable discussion, settled, and the way was cleared for proceeding with a revision of the Act. In due course, a draft Report containing tentative proposals on the subject was prepared, and approved for circulation, and circulated by the previous Commission for comments to State Governments, High Courts, Bar Associations and other interested persons and bodies. But the work of ﬁnalising the draft Report was not concluded and so, the report on this subject was not forwarded by the Commission to the Government. Since this problem has remained with the Commission for quite some time, we thought that we should now take up the task, as the more urgent matters, which claimed our attention during the last two years or more, have now been dealt with, and our Reports in respect of them have been forwarded to the Government. The Member--Secretary to the Commission prepared for our consideration a fresh draft Report, after a study _of the Act and also after taking into account the comments received on the proposals of the earlier Commission. This draft Report was treated by us as a working paper for our discussion. We ought to add that we have examined the Act section by section, and have considered the question whether any section requires to be amended or revised, or any new provision requires to be added. 1.3. The objects of the Act are several, namely, (1) to shorten the language of Central Acts; (2) to provide, as far as possible, for uniformity of expression in Central Acts, by giving deﬁnitions of a series of terms in common use; (3) to state explicity certain convenient rules for the construction and interpretation of Central Acts; and (fl) to guard against slips and oversights by importing into every Act certain common form clauses, which otherwise ought to be inserted expressly in every Central Act. Of course, in the above statement, when we refer to Central Acts, we also include Regulations and Ordinances, and statutory instrument made under Central Acts, Regulations and Ordinances. - 1.4. The General Clauses Act , thus, makes provisions as to the construction of General Acts and other laws of all-India application. Its importance, therefore, in point of the number of enactments to which it applies, is obvious. ' 1. 28th September, 1959. '. Para 1.27 to 1.31, infra. Subject- matter of the Report. Reference to the ' _ Commission. Objects of the Act. Importance of the General Clauses Act. Importance of uniformity. Importance of statute law today. Legislation as princi- pal means of growth. 2 Much more, however, can be said about the importance of an interpretation Act, which has been called the "Law of all laws". In so far as certainty in the application of the law is a desideratum itself, an interpretation Act seeks to introduce that certainty, in the limited sphere in which it operates- l.5- One of the objects of the Act, as already pointed out above, is to shorten the language of statutes and to achieve, as far as possible, uniformity of expression in such language. Its importance is evident from what Bentham saidlz "The language of error is always obscure and indeﬁnite. An abundance of words serves to cover a paucity and a falsity of ideas. The oftner terms are changed, the easier it is to delude the reader. The language of truth is uniform and simple. The same ideas are always expressed by the same terms." But for the control exercised by the General Clauses Act over statutory language, it would have been a "free for all" affair so far as the use, meaning and interpretation of words and language in our statute law are concerned. 1.6. It is desirable, in this context, to emphasise the importance of statute law today. It was towards the end of the last century, that the present General Clauses Act was enacted; statute law did not then possess, in its volume and range, the importance which it now possesses, though, of course, much of the lawyer's law had been codiﬁed in India by that time. Since 1897, the number of statutes and statutory instruments has multiplied every year. As the position stood towards the end of 1971, there were about 700 Central Acts of permanent duration, and the number of statutory instruments issued under these Acts would run literally into thousands. Litigation involving questions of statutory construction, constitute now the bulk of the total litigation in India. It is, therefore, obvious that an enactment which is intended to deal' with the process of interpretation of statutes, is now of much greater importance than it could have been in the last century. 127- Pound has called attention to the fact that legislation is the principal characteristic and means of growth in mature legal systems". As has been observed3 National development, as we understand it in the world today, involves a vast amount of governmental planning "and programming, not only to expedite the process of development, but to direct their course along desired lines. A great volume of legislative enactments is required to validate plans and programmes and the actions necessary for their implementation. For these reasons, enacted or statutory law has acquired predominant importance in modern developing nations." "Taken by itself, statutory law, that is, law consciously and purposely adopted to meet social needs as they arise, is certainly a higher stage of legal development than customary law. . . . .Not a few of us may look forward to a time when with us, as with most other Western Nations, practically all law shall be statutory4." The importance of increase in the tempo of legislative activity was stressed, in the United States, by the late Justice Felix Frankfurter. He pointed out that the proportion of cases coming before the United States Supreme Court which did not involve statutory issues, had fallen from 40 per cent in 1875 to 5 per cent in 1925, and almost to zero in 19475. ' 1. Bentham Theory of Legislation (Hi1dreth's Edition), 19c4, page 87. _ _ Pound "Sources and Forms of Law", (1946) 22 Notre Dame Lawyer 1, cited in Sands, "Statutory Construction ' and National Development," (1969) 18 I.C.L.Q. 205. a_ sands, "Statutory Construction & National Development", (1969) 18 I.C.L.Q. 206. 210. Ernest Bruncken, "The Common Law and Statutes", (1920) 29 Yale L]. 516, 522. "s R fl t' on the Reading of Statutes", Sixth Annual Benjamin N. Cardozo Lecture deli- si flabrgie thganifssofiaﬁiiihogté the Bar of the City of New York,.March 18, 1947; (1947) 2 Record of the Assn. of the Bar of the City of New York, No 6 (1947) ; 47 Columbia L. Rev. 527 ; quoted by Sands, "Statutory Construction and National DcV6l0Dm6T1f" (1959) 18 I-C-I--Q 206: 210- 3 1.8. It should be pointed out that legislation has not been regarded always as a mere supplement to, or taking out of common law or customary law. On the contrary, an older view was that enacted law was the normal type, and customary law a mere makeshift to which men resorted, for want of enactment, to prevent a failure of justice. Roman law after Justinian was a body of enactments, and this idea is very prominent from the sixth century to the rise of the school at Bologna in the twelfth century} The Roman Jurist Gaiusi' classiﬁed statutes as one form of "law", and Justinian's Corpus Juris was, as legislation of the Emperor, regarded as binding statute law for centuries on the continent. For some time, even a view prevailed that the rules of the common law had their origin in forgotten statutes." It was the rise and development of vigorous body of judge-made law in the King's courts, and the paucity of legislation from the time of Henry the 2nd until Henry the 8th, which rendered legislation tmimportant in the growing period of the English legal system.' 19- The tide has now turned again. In any modern society with an aspiration for the im- provement of the conditions. of the life of the people, legislation is par excellence the source of law. Therefore, importance of the General Clauses Act , having regard to the growing impor- tance of legislation in society, is obvious. Maine put the matter lucidly when he stated" : "The capital fact in the mechanism of modern states is the energy of legislatures." As the development of law goes on, the function of the judges is conﬁned within growing limits; the main source of modiﬁcations in legal relation comes to be more and more exclusively the legislature." We are making these observations in order to emphasise the importance of the General Clauses Act . 1.10. It is not, of course, implied that the General Clauses Act , or, for that matter, the Inter- pretation Act of any other country, codiﬁes all the 'rules' of statutory interpreation. The so-called rules of interpretation are really in the nature of guide~lines," and are not to be treated as mathematical formula. In fact, even the deﬁnitions contained in the General Clauses Act (and ,many of the general rules of construction which are incorporated in it) apply only where the context does not otherwise require. This shows that the Act itself does not purport to treat rules of con- struction as categorical imperatives. 1.1l. Even so, the value and utility of the General Clauses Act is considerable, because it not only constitutes the reference book of the judge when dealing with statutes, but serves as the draftsman's labour--saving device. It lays down rules which would have been tedious to repeat in every statute, thus shortening the language of legislative enactments- 'I'he aspect of shortening the language has been emphasised again and again in the speeches relating to the General Clauses Act, 1868 and General Clauses Act, 1897 , in the course of the legislative proceedings. It has also been referred to by the Supreme Court." . Pound, "Common Law and Legislation" (1907-1908) 21 Harvard Law Review 383, 388. . Gaius I. 2. . Janka, Law and Politics in the Middle Ages, p. 1. . See Pound, "Common Law and Legislation", (1907-1908) 21 Harvard Law Review 383, 389. . Maine, Early History of Institutions, Lect. xiii, cited by Pound, Common Law & Legislation (1907-1908) 21 Harvard Law Rev. v. 383, 402. , . Sidgwick, Elements of Politics, 2 ed. . See also para 2.8, infra. 8. Subramaniam v. Official Receiver, A.I.R. 1953 S. C. 1. 15-MofLaw/ 74~ 2 go' 'J:-56¢..- Act not intended to codify rules of interpreta- tion. Shortening the language. imp1iﬁca- an in anguage- Iflportance I . istory. 3ackground- English Act . .-Iistorical - -ackground ---Indian kct )f 1868. Act of 1889 ind Act )f 1897 Present let). 4 1.12. The importance of simpliﬁcation in language should not be under--estimated. As has been observed by the Canadian Law Commission:1-2 "A part of the task (of Law reform) involves making the laws more understandable and more meaningful to the average citizen. Thus, a speciﬁc effort must be made, not only to improve law in its substance, but to reduce legal complexity and technicality. This will require a study of topics that, on the surface, may appear technical, but that, in fact, affect, in telling ways, the realisation through law of the aspirations of the average man and woman for fair treatment for themselves and for others." 1.13. A few other points of a general nature may now be dealt with. It may be con- venient to begin with the history of the Act. It would appear that the idea of having a device for shortening statutes could be traced to Bentham and to those who took up the criticism of the legal system made by Bentham.' 1.14. In England, the ﬁrst interpretation Act, known as Lord Brougham's Act, was passed as far back as 1850. In 1889, the Act was replaced by the Interpretation Act. This Act is the source of subsequent Interpretation Acts, not only in England, but also in other countries of the Commonwealth. 1.15. The provisions of Lord Brougham's Act,4 with a few additions, were adopted in India, and enacted as the General Clauses Act, 1868 (1 of 1868). A Bill on the subject had been conceived of much earlier, but it could not be prepared for various reasons, chief among them being the impression that such a Bill might possibly be suggested by the Indian Law Commissioners.5 Ultimately, the Bill leading to the Act of 1868 was drafted by Whitley Stokes. In drafting the Bill, Stokes drew not only upon the earlier English statutes on the subject, but also upon the illustrations of rules of construction prepared by Arthur Symondsf' The Act of 1868 was of a measure of a limited character. It was incomplete; but, in so far as the ground covered was concerned, it worked "fairly well". It considerably shortened the language of subsequent Central Acts. Its utility made the legislative Department think of mak- ing useful additions to it. A supplementary General Clauses Act was later enacted as the General Clauses Act, 1887 (1 of 1887). This Act was drafted by Sir C. Ilbert. Ilbert described the process by which he arrived at the list of additions proposed, in the following words.7 "The additions which I propose to make are based on personal experience during the last few years. I have had a list prepared of the special deﬁnitions inserted in Acts of Council and I ﬁnd on examination of this list that there are some dozen or so of these deﬁnitions which might with advantage be generalised and added to the list contained in the Act of 1868. I also propose to generalize certain provisions which have so frequently recurred in 9 99 recent Acts as to have become what conveyancers call 'common form . 1.16. In 1889, a comprehensive and consolidating Act on the subject was enacted in England. Our General Clauses Act, 1897 , is largely modelled on that Act. It consolidates the two earlier enactments of 1868 and 1887, and includes a few new provisions taken from the (English) Interpretation Act, 1889. . Law Reform Commission of Canada, Research Program 1, (March 1972) page 7. . See also para 2.6, infra. . Carr, "The Mechanics of Law-making", (1951) Current Legal Problems , page 122. . Para 1.14, Supra. . Gazette of India, August 24,1867, page 1220. , whitley Stokes Anglo Indian Code (1887) Vol 1, page 485 . Legislative proceedings (1886), page 305 ~lO\LIq-thing)- \4 'I 5 117- Every State has its own General Clauses Act,1 which applies to State Acts. The lead in this matter was taken by the former Presidencies of Bombay, Bengal and Madras. The earliest Act on the subject was Bombay Act 10 of 1866. The ﬁrst General Clauses Act in Madras and Bengal was enacted in 1867 (Madras Act 1 of 1867 and Bengal Act 5 of 1867). 1.18. The Central Act of 1897 has stood the test of time. Its value in avoiding super- ﬂuity of language in statutes has been commended by courts. There can be no better testi- mony of its utility than the fact that courts have, on considerations of equity, justice and good conscience, thought fit to extend its principles not only to subordinate legislation," but also to private documents.3 The Act has also served as a model for all States General Clauses Acts. Lastly. the Act has been expressly applie. to the interpmtation of the Constitution' by article 367 of the Constitution. 1.19. Since the passing of the Act, however, far--reaching changes have taken place in this country. The constitutional set-up has altered completely after the attainment of independence, and the volume of legislation has increased considerably. The range and variety of the new legislation has given rise to substantial changes in legislative practice. The quantity of sub- ordinate legislation has also assumed large proportions. Some provisions of the Act of 1897 have come up for judicial consideration. A few of them have given rise to conﬂict of views. No large--scale revision of the General Clauses Act has so far been undertaken. Certain minor amendments were made by the amending Acts of 1903 and 1936. In addition, by various Adaptation Orders, the Act was, from time to time, amended to bring it in conformity with Government of India Act, 1935 and with the Constitution. But the scope of such amendments was necessarily limited. Time has come when the Act should be completely reviewed, so as to bring it in line with the fundamental constitutional changes and the new trends in legislative practice. 1.20. Before making our detailed recommendations for revision of the Act, we consider it necessary to examine a few preliminary questions. One such question relates to the form which the proposed changes should take. The basic question is whether there should be one interpreta- tion Act, or whether there should be two Interpretation Acts. Need for making a choice in this respect arises because a View has been put-fourth that the present General Clauses Act should continue for the interpretation of the existing Central Acts etc. and a new full-ﬂeged interpretation Act should be proposed for the interpretation of Central Acts etc. to be enacted hereafter. In this connection, we may note that in the proposals for revision of the Act, circulated by the earlier Commission)' one suggestion was that there should be two-Acts.----the present Act may be preserved for existing Central Acts etc. and a new Interpretation Act may be enacted to apply to new enactments. But it should be added that the Commission had no opportunity of taking a ﬁnal decision in the matter; and, in fact, because of its pre--occupation with urgent work, the matter remained undisposed of when the term of the Commission came to a close. 1.21. We have carefully considered the matter in all its aspects, and are inclined to take the View that the simultaneous existance of two interpretation Acts is likely to create unnecessary complications. Citizens as well as lawyers will be required to make themselves familiar with both the Acts, for a considerable time to come, because it is unlikely that all the existing Central Acts will be removed from the Statute Book within a reasonably foreseeable future. Diversity of judi- cial interpretation in respect of two sets of identical provisions may also create problems, and 1. See para 1.33,infra also. 3. Para 12.22 to 12.26, infra. 3. Para 6.21 A and 6.22, infra. 4. Article 367 of the Constitution, para 1.27, infra. 5. Para 1.2, supra. State Acts. Utility of the present Act. Need for change. Whether there should be one Act or two Acts. One Act preferred. #1 I-Iomo- eneity of Jentral icts assed ince 868. Form of the proposed 'egislation. \mending xct referred. Broad :onsidera- tions borne in mind when revising the Act. 6 such diversity will harm the uniformity of the law. Statute Book were to have two General Clauses Acts for the interpretation of Central Acts. No doubt, the initiation of a totally new interpretation Act (with only prospective effect) has an advantage inasmuch as the redical changes will not apply to existing Acts. But the same object could, in a fair measure, be achieved by suggesting new provisions for incorpration in the present Act, at the same time making those new provisions prospective'. The proposals for having two Acts does not, in this respect, have any peculiar merit. 1.22. It may be stated that though, during the period since 1868, there were different Cons- titution Acts in force at different times, yet Central Acts passed since 1868 have a certain amount of homogeneity. Hence, it is logical to have one Act for their interpretation. As regards the new provisions to be inserted in the Act, care is being taken to ensure that such of them as are likely to create any difficulty will be prospective only. For all these reasons, we think that the alternative of having one Act, is not likely to create any serious practical difficulty. In any case, the advantage of having one Interpretation Act for all Central Acts far outweighs the slight disadvantage that certain diﬂiculties may possibly arise in a few odd cases in discerning which provisions apply to which Central Act. 1.23. There is another preliminary question_to be considered. Assuming that there is to be one Interpretation Act" what should be the form which the proposed legislation should take 7 The new legislation can possibly take one of the following forms :----- (1) An amending Act; or (ii) A new Act which will apply to all Central Acts. whether passed before or after the commencement of the new Act. 1.24. We prefer the ﬁrst course, namely, an amending Act. The General Clauses Act, 1897 , already makes a distinction between (a) Central Acts made after the 3rd January, 1868 (the date of commencement of the General Clauses Act, 1867 ); (b) Central Acts and Regulations made after the 14th January, 1887; and (c) Central Acts made after the 11th March, 1897 (the date of commencement of the Act of 1897). To these categories will be added one more cate- gory, namely, Central Acts and Regulations made after the commencement of the amending Act. This may appear to be complicated; but it cannot be avoided. The complicated structure is already there in the existing Act. What the amending Act will do is only to add one more cate- 3013'- 1.25. This disposes of the preliminary questions. So far as the revision of individual sec» tions of the Act is concerned, we have borne in mind a few broad considerations which we may now mention. In the ﬁrst place, where a particular section of the Act has led to a conﬂict of decisions, or other difﬁculties of interpretation, we have tried to settle the law. Secondly, apart from such conﬂict or difﬁculties, where the particular provision was found to be juristically wrong3, we have tried to set right. Thirdly, we have recommended the addition of new provisions' where the gap in the existing law was found to cause diﬂiculties in practice. 1.26. It will be apparent from the following Chapters of this report that the recom- mendations that we have made are not numerous or radical. This is a tribute to the draftsman- ship of the present Act, which has stood the test of time for three quarters of a century. On the whole, the provisions of the Act have caused no serious diﬁiculty5. No doubt, a I . See para. 1.22, infra. . Para 1.22, supra. E. g., section 3- -"aﬂidavit". . E. g., the proposed provision as to temporary Acts, Chapter 7, infra. . See para. 1.18, supra. v:A.uu._ It would, thus, be a serious anomaly if the 7 certain amount of technical language is bound to recur in an Interpretation Act. as the subject- matter deals with abstractions familiar to lawyers but not to laymen. One cannot, therefore. expect here the excellence of limpid language found in, say, continental Codes, and in some l7 of our own laws. However, at some places, the legislative style was tortured1 and left scope for improvement. We hope that in the recommendations made by us, we have been able to arrive at a statement of law which, on the whole, can be described as clear, simple and precise 1.27. There is a constitutional question which we would like to dispose of at the outset. f,'[3'et§'e'°'a'i°" It concerns the interpretation of the Constitution, and can be appropri:>.tely rnentioned in conne('- 9Qnsmu_ tion with the revision of this Act. The question? arises, mainly, from the language of article "O"- -- 367 of the Constitution, which reads as follows :----- "Unless the context otherwise requi.='es. the General Clauses Act . 1897, shall. subject to any adaptations and nicdiﬁcations that may be made therein under article 372. apply for the interpretation of this Constitution as it (m[)Iies' for the interpretation ' of an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India." Since this article refers to "an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India", the query may Y' be raised if it is permissible to modify or revise the General Clauses Act , lest such modiﬁcation or revision should introduce complications in the literal application of article 367. In other words, the question is whether amendments concerning the existing General Clauses Act . in so far as the Act applies to Central Acts, would, in any manner, dislocate the operation of that Act in relation to the Constitution. That is the question to which we address ourselves. 1.28. It appears to us that there should be no such difficulty. Any amendments. additions NO or deletions which may be made in the General Clauses Act, 1897 , would not affect the Consti- difﬁculty tution. Interpretation of the Constitution will continue to be governed by the General Clauses hkely' Act, as in force immediately before the C0nSliIl!ll07?3. The Act -cannot be so repealed or modiﬁed as to affect the interpretation of the Constitution. 1.29. It may be stated that the concluding words in article 367--" as it applies tor the inter- Debates pretation of an Act of the Legislature of the Dominion of India",--were added in the Constituent 3" the '/ Assembly, by an amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar, who thus explained their utility': f{§','?j,§,'{,'ff,f" > "The point is this, that the General Clauses Act applies to Acts, Regulations and Ordi- nances. It is, therefore. necessary to say to which class of these laws this will apply. That is the reason why the amendment is proposed." Shri T. T. Krishnamachari made the position clear : " . . . . . . . . ..what we want is that only those particular portion: which refer to Acts s should apply, so far as this particular clause is concerned The concluding words of article 367 do not, therefore, mean that the General Clauses Act '. should be preserved for all times in its pre--l950 form. The Act can be revised or modiﬁed; but the unmodiﬁed Act will continue to govern the interpretation of the Constitution. 1.30. Will section 8 of the General Clauses Act, which provides that when an enactrrieiit Eﬁectof is repealed and re-enacted, references to the old enactment will be construed as references to the sectior_18 *,re--enacted one, make any diﬁerence ? We do not think so. It should be noted that the words §g'7""'°1° 1. E. g. section 6A, para 6.10, infra. 2. At a very early stage of consideration of this Act before a previous Law Commissior this query was dealt with. _ ' " 3. Subject to adaptations made under article 372 of the Constitution. 4. Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. IX, Part III, pages 1641-1642, discussion relating to article 3C7.(-) Conclusion. Title of the Act. State law. 8 "unless the context otherwise requires" (in article 367 )' mean that the General Clauses Act , section 8 , is to be excluded. Even by its terms, section 8 of the General Clauses Act will not apply to the Constitution, because expression "enactment" (which occurs in section 8 ) would not take in the Constitution, which is not an "enactment". The Constitution is supreme and is, in fact, the foundation of all enactments. ' 1.31. Our conclusion, therefore, is that the revision or amendment of the General Clauses I Act, 1897 , will not, in any way, aﬂect the operation of article 367; and the General Clauses Act , [897 as it stood immediately before 26 January, 1950 (subject to adaptations made under the Constitution) will continue to apply. 1.32. In many countries, Acts similar to the General Clauses Act are called Interpretation Acts. But, as the provisions of the General Clauses Act (whether relating to deﬁnitions and meanings of words and terms or dealing with construction and interpretation) are, so far as may be necessary, common to every Central Act, the title " General Clauses Act " is not less appro- priate than the title "Interpretation Act". For this reason, and also because this title has been in vogue for more than a century, we do not recommend any change therein. The Supreme Court had perhaps, this in mind when it observed in the case of Chief Inspector of Mines §" K. C. Thaparl: v "Whatever the General Clauses Act says, whether as regards the meanings of words 01': as regards legal principles, has to be read into every Act to which it applies." 1.33. It may also be noted that though Act does not, in terms apply to State laws, it is evident that the State General Clauses Acts should conform to the General Clauses Act of 1897, for, otherwise, divergent rules of construction and interpretation would apply, and. as a result, great confusion might ensue. Thus, excepting a few provisions in the Central Act, such as those contained in section 5 , nearly all its remaining provisions are as appropriate for State Act and Ordinances asifor the Central Acts and Ordinances and. have, in fact, been adopted in all the State General Clauses Acts. The result has been that a certain amount of uniformity has been achieved in the language of the entire body of statute law of this country. 1. Para 1.27, supra. 2. Chieffnspector afMt'nes v. K.C. thapar, (1961) 2 S.C.A. 86, 89; AIR 1961, SC 838, 843 (Das Gupta). CHAPTER 2 STATUTORY INTERPRETATION 2.1. In this Chapter, we propose to refer to certain general aspects of statutory interpreta- Introduc- tnry. tion. 2.2. Interpretation is as old as language. Elaborate rules of interpretation were evolved Interpfctw even at a very early stage of the Hindu civilisation and culture. The rules given by J aimini, the Lismad as author of the Mimansat Sutras, originally meant for the Srutis, were employed for the interpreta- language- tion of the Smritis also. All the commentators and writers of Nibandhas invariably adopted these canons of interpretation for their own purposes, so much so that these interpretations or comments sometimes became more difficult and abstruse than the original texts commented uponl. K.A. Nélkanta Sastry, a distinguished scholar, has observed": ) "With reference to the system of Jaimini (Mimansa) it has for its main object, the determination of doubtful points in the elaborate rituals enjoined by the Vedas by discussion and interpretation. It raises and answers, incidentally, some ques- tions of great interest." The importance of avoiding literal interpretation has also been stressed in one of the ancient text books" 2 "Merely following the texts of the law, decisions are not to be rendered, for, if such decisions are wanting in Equity, a gross failure of Dharma is caused'." The Bhavishya Purana5 has an apt verse dealing with the rule to be followed for the resolu- tion of conﬂict between Smriti and Artha as well as for the resolution of inconsistency between the rules of the Smritis themselves. And Kalidas has described, in ringing words which have become immortal, the indissoluble , link between "word" and "meaning°". , According to Naradal, when Smritis and Artha Sastra are inconsistent, the presumption of Arthasastra is superseded by Smritis". In case of mutual inconsistency, however, that rule is authentic which is in accord with equity'. 2.3. Interpretation, thus, is a familiar process of considerable signiﬁcance. In relation to Interpreta- statute law, interpretation is of importance because of the inherent nature of legislation as a :it',:{'m';£_ source of law. The process of statute making and the process of interpretation of statutes take Importance place separately from each other, and two different agencies are concerned. An interpretation °f' Act serves as the bridge of understanding between the two. 1. U.C. Sarkar, Epoche in Hindu Legal History (1958), page 167. 2. K.A. Nilakanta Sastry, "Mimamsa Doctrine of Works" (1921) Indian Antiquary p. 211. 3. Brihaspati. 4. %a'<'~m; smamfw: =r arésai fa Twain: t;ﬁ?rg'T='r faarfig Erésnﬁrz snvﬁr 5 Fianna Faxing mimrarcr a?eI=r¥{ tm'a'< f=«t*<'fe'r<-31 {tangent Faﬁsr: win: wferwrgtt 6 antsﬁﬁaz man amisrfasrar? Ema: ﬁ1a'<'t Er-*2 crr$ia°rq-<5: ml 7. Narada Ch. 1, verse 40. K 8. Translation by Dr. Ludo Rocher, Vyavahar Chintameni of Vachaspati (Chent.1956). 9 . qﬁvnw t'«'a"('n': at zgferanjnt Fetter: I-'aft: A process of ﬁnding out. And: to interpreta- tron. Object of Interpreta- tinn Act to standar- dise the interpreta- tion. Not possible to codify rules- Acharya's suggestion not accepted. 10 Judicial determination of questions of law requires the use of materials of various types, depending on the nature of the question. In the interpretation of statutory provisions the material used will naturally have a sharply legal character, as distirct from the application of a general common law doctrine where it may have a more diffused character. In statutes, greater precision is, therefore, required. The process of interpretation is more legalistic and makes more inten- sive use of the legal technique in statutory interpretation, as contrasted with the application of common law rules. 2.4. No idea is exactly what it appears in the linguistic form in which it is expressed'. There is always something which is behind the linguistic form, and which goes deeper: and it is the function of interpretation to see that this is made explicit. In this process (which is a process of ﬁnding out), we come to grips with the subject in all its wealth of inter--relations, and with particular aspects which, perhaps, we never suspected to exist, thougali they are closely bound up with the ideas. 2.5. In this process of interpretation, several aids are used. They may be statutory or non- statutory. The former category (statutory aids) is illustrated by the General Clauses Act , and by speciﬁc deﬁnitions contained in individual Acts, as also by certain provisions of a general nature which are, for example, contained in the Indian Penal Code 2, and are relevant to the cons- truction of penal enactments. The latter is illustrated by common law rules of interpretation (in- cluding certain presumptions relating to interpretation), and also by case-law relating to the in- terpretation of statutes. ' Holland3 has dealt with the function of interpretation at length. For the present purpose, it is suﬂicient to mention that he has drawn a clear distinction between "authentic" interpretation on the one hand and other aids to interpretation, on the other hand. 2.6. An interpretation Act is, thus*, one of the aids to interpretation. The primary pur- pose of an interpretation Act is to standardise the interpretation. The importance and utility of this aspect should not be under-rated. The avoidance of uncertainty as to the meaning of statute law helps the average citizen, by reducing the scope for ingenious argument. It is, therefore, an eﬁort to simplify and "demystify" the substantive law". 2.7. It is obvious that all "rules of interpretation" cannot be codiﬁed. Some rules are only guidelines, as we have already stated". A suggestion was made by the later Professor Acharya. in his Tagore Law Lectures on Codiﬁcation in British India7, that the scope of the General Clauses Act should be extended so as to make it a comprehensive code on the interpretation- of statutes. This suggestion is, no doubt, attractive at ﬁrst sight; but a close scrutiny will reveal its impracticability. It is not possible to incorporate, in an Interpretation Act, the rules of interpretation enunciated in the text books on the subject. One of the main reasons for having an Interpretation Act is to facilitate the task of the draftsman in preparing parliamentary legislation. The courts also have recourse to Interpretation Acts to interpret statutes; but they do not conﬁne themselves to these Acts. They certainly take the aid of accepted rules of interpretation as laid down in decided cases. Moreover, a certain degree of elasticity is necessary in this branch of the law. Rules of construction of statutes are not static. Aims and objects of legislation will be better served by appropriate judicial interpretation of the law, rather than by rigid provisions in the laws themselves. At present, Judges have a certain amount of latitude in the matter, which enables Paule Preire's article in 1970 Seminar "Tomorrow began yesterday" (Educ. International). . Chapters 2 to 4, Indian Penal Code . Holland on Jurisprudence. . Para 2.5, supra. . See also para 1 .8, supra. . Chapter 1, supra. . Acharya, Codiﬁcation in British India, pages 189, 191. \IO\'JIJ>-LA-|l\3"' ll them to do justice, after taking into consideration the nature and charactienof 'each. statute. If the rules of construction are given a statutory form, the consequential rigidity in this branch of the law is likely to do more harm than good. 2.8. For example, the maxin--"Expressio unius exclusio aIierius"--has been thus commen- ted upon by Max Radinl : "So far from being logical, as some courts have called it, it illustrates one of the most famously simple of logical fallacies, the 'illicit major', long the pons asinorum of school-boys2. And yet, in a widely used cyclopaedia" there are at least seven hundred cases cited in which the maxim has been applied or explained. "It has been called an axiom by the House of Lords, and it has been said of it that no maxim is of more general and uniform application.' Yet, in the same case in which the House of Lords called it axiomatic5, it was disregarded; and the ﬁrst case of its 'application' cited in the Corpus juris is a case in the United States Supreme Court in which it was rejected."" How various and variable such considerations are is graphically illustrated by a collection of the various canons of construction by Karl Llewellyn and Charles -Driscoll? Each rule of construction of statutes, it is stated, is answered by a counter--rule. Each thrust is met by a parrv. Some mles of law can be fixed and certain, but it is clear, as Arristotle realised", that there is a "whole class of matters which cannot be decided. . . .properly by rules of law". To meet this difficulty", "Law trains the holders of office expressly in its sprit, and then sets them to decide and settle those residuary issues 'as justly as in them lies'1°". 2.9. Statutes are the expressions of the will of an authority constituted by society to announce general obligatory legal rules. The binding force of statute law attaches to the formula in which the law is expressed". The task of interpretation of a statute is of extracting, from the formula, all that it contains of legal rules, with a view to adapting it, as perfectly as possible, to the facts of life"-'. Therefore, the insertion of rigid rules may go against the very concept of interpreta- tion. Moreover, with the passage of time, there may be changes in the meaning of words. As has been stated", "some words are conﬁned to their history, while some are starting points for history." To quote Lord Reid", "All these canons of construction give a lot of material for people who like dealing with them, but I do not think they are more than guides, and guides which take you a very short way." 2.10. However, where there is a conﬂict of judicial opinion on a speciﬁc question, it is both proper and necessary to resolve the conﬂict. In suggesting the incorporation of new rules of construction, we have followed this principle. 1. Max Radin, "Statutory Interpretation", (1929-1930) 43 Harv. L. Rev. 863, 875. . c. f. Jevons, Elementary Lessons in Logic (1918), 132. . (1921) 25 Corpus Juris, 220. . See Saunders V. Evans, (1861) 8 H.L. Cas. 72], 727. Saunders v. Evans, (1861) 8 H. L. Cas. 721. United States v. Barnes. (1912) 222 U.S. 513. K.N. Llewellyn, "Better Theory of Legal Interpretation", (1950), 3 Vend. L. Rev. 395, 401-406. . Aristotle, Politics, Ill, XV, S. 6 . . B. E. King, Review of Levi's Introduction to Legal Reasoning, (1953) Cam. L. J. 126. . Aristotle, Politics lll, XVI. S. 5 . . Geny, Methode, Part 111, C.l., cited in Stone, Legal System, (1964), page 216. . Stone, Legal System, (1964) p. 216. . Frankfurter, "Reading of Statutes", cited in Stone, Legal System, (1964), page 351, footnote 29. . Lord Reid in (1955) Australian Law Journal 221. 15 M of Law/74-3 Statutes to be adopted to facts of life. Speciﬁc conﬂicts to be set right. Interpreta- tion Acts and the C011'! D1011 law. Interpreta- tion may partake of the character of law- making. ludicial "law-making in three situations". 12 2.1]. Provisions in interpretation Acts can, in respect of their relationship with the Com- mon Law, be analysed thus. First, there are provisions which declare the law. In many instances, such provisions simply state the rule of law announced by the courts in their de- cisions,' with the result that the general principles of the construction of statutes are, in effect, codiﬁed. In other words, the statute will simply state the rules of law already declared and applied by the courts. Where this is the case, obviously. the statute has very little, if any, eﬂect upon the judicial attitude. Secondly, there are various statutory rules of construction which embody efforts of the legislature to correct constructions which it has deemed erroneous. Such rules seek to sub- stitute new rules of construction for existing ones, and thereby alter the common law. '1' hirdly, there are statutory rules of construction which add to the common law. We have not referred to the above aspect merely as one of academic interest. It helps to elucidate one possible channel in which the reform of the law could be directed,--~the conﬁrmation or modification of rules of interpretation laid down by courts, or the addition of rules on matters which have not so far come up before the courts. 2.12. It is, of course, well-recognised that interpretation is not merely a process of spell- ing out the meaning by set guidelines. Sometimes, it has to partake of the character of law- making. While the judiciary would not have much scope for law~making where the language is clear and the purpose of the statute is deﬁnite. its scope for law--making is undisputed when the statute itself consciously delegates the creation of the norm of the judiciary. Interpretation is not pure mathematics, where the answers given by every person to the particular mathematical problem must 'rally with each other if the answers are correct. As we shall show later,2 a certain amount of latitude is left to those who have to interpret and, to this extent, interpretaion resembles law-making. Morris Cohen pointed out, "You 'cannot construct a building out of the rules of architec- ture".3 As Judge Learned Hand' said,»- "OF course, it is true that the words used, even in their literal sense, are the primary, and ordinarily the most reliable, source of interpreting the meaning of any writ- ing: be it a statute, a contract, or anything else. But it is one of the surest in- dexes of a mature and developed jurisprudence not to make a fortress out of the dictionary." 2.13. Julius Cohen5 has distinguished three main situations covered by the loose term "iudicial law-making" relating to statutes----(i) One is very rare, namely, the usurpatory kind, where the clear 'language and purpose' of the statute are subverted and replaced by the court's own policy. (ii) a second (non-unsurpatory) kind is where, for some reason, the legislator has (in effect) consciously delegated norm-creation to the judiciary. whether because ﬂexi- bility of administration is required as in the Sherman Anti-Trust Law), or because conﬂicting views and interests within the legislature prevent agreement on anything but vague expression (iii) The third is where there is neither clarity of language and purpose, nor a conscious dele- gation, but single vagueness or ambiguity, or internal inconsistency of language, affecting the statutory words. In this, as distinct from the first two kinds, the judicial search is for legislative meaning, and, thus, for legislative policy. The judicial task, in cases of this third kind, is to 1. See Crawford, Statutory construction, (1940) pages 751352. 2. Para 2.13, infra. 3. M. R. Cohen, Social Order, 173. 4. Cabal!'-I. Markham, 14R F 2d 737 (2nd Cir 1945) cited in Friedmarm. legal Theor}. (1967). rage 458. 5. J. Cohen, "Judicial Legislation", (1961) 36 Indiana L.J.414, 419, 423, cited in Stone. legal System (1964), 353. 13 mend the legislative expression so as to yield a solution that can reasonably be attributed to the legislature, whether by surface search of the syntax, by reading in the context of the whole statute. by probing for a principle which the statute expresses, or for hints of the legislator's purpose, consciously or unconsciously held by him. 2.14. Thus, it will not be sufficient merely to deﬁne the concept as a matter of semantics, Dutyof - or to describe or explain it by taking its implications, as a given--fact. The interpreter has to adopt a position of commitment towards the Act which he is to interpret. :01' a en. This is not to say that the interpreter should start with pre--conceived attitudes. Julius Stone has observed, that1 in most questions of statutory interpretation which are likely to come before an appellate court, there is involved an important element of evaluation, of deciding what is the more desirable result which can be brought within the verbal framework of the legislator's expression. If the Court is not engaged in legislation, it is, at any rate, as Professor Cohen has suggested,'-' engaged in "legisputation." 2.15. The central aim in the "administration of a statute is to discover or formulate, as Adminism. well as give effect to, principles or formulas for elaborating the purposes bearing upon the gitgltluﬁ; statute". And in this view, the principles when discovered are thereafter to be applied as in- ¢em,a1a;m_ tegral principles of the law. Judicial interpretation of statutes, and judicial law-making by statutory analogy, are in other words, to be seen as one process, and not as contrasted.3 We have made these observations to deﬁne the scope of interpretation in general. We shall now proceed to speciﬁc topics arising out of the General Clauses Act . 1. Julius Stone, Legal System (1964), page 352 and footnote 35. 2. Cohen, "Judicial Legisputation and the Dimensions of Legislative meaning", (1961) 36 Indiana 1...]. 414, 423, esp. 414 and 419. 3. J. P. Witherson, The Essential Focus of Interpretation" referred to in Stone, Legal System (1964), page 352, footnote 35. Introductory. Section 3- --opening line----amend- merit regarding. Section 3(1) --- "abet". Section 3(2) --- "act". Section 3 ( 3) "atti- davit" CHAPTER 3 DEFINITIONS 3.1. Three sections of the General Clauses Act ,----- sections 3 , 4 and 4A,--contain general deﬁnitions. Not many general observations as to these deﬁnitions are required, since most of the points which we have to deal with, concern matters of detail pertaining to particular words and expressions deﬁned in the various clauses of these sections. In general, however, it may be observed that when a particular word or expression which has not been deﬁned in the Gene- ral Clauses Act , comes to be used with increasing frequency so as to become the current coin of the legislature, opportunity should be taken to consider whether it should not be deﬁned in the Interpretation Act, so as to ensure uniformity,----provided, of course, it is ﬁrst assured that the expression is used in a broadly uniform sense and has thus become a term of art. We have, in suggesting amendments in these sections, kept this consideration in mind. 3.lA. It may be noted that section 3 , which is the principal section containing deﬁnitions, applies to the General Clauses Act itself and to post-1897 Central Acts and Regulations. Now, we are recommending the insertion, in the section, of a few new deﬁnitions, and some of them may not be appropriate for applying to existing Central Acts and Regulations. These will be enumerated in a separate section} and it is desirable to make it clear that section 3 will be subject to that section. Accordingly, we recommend an amendment of the opening line of section 3 , as follows :--- Section 3 (opening lines) 4 in section :, before the words, "In this Act," the words, ﬁgure and letter "subject to the provisions of seciirm SA." shall be inserted? 3.2 Section 3(1) deﬁnes the expression "abet". It needs no change. We have taken into account the decisions on abetment under the Penal Code, but they do not necessitate any change here. 3.3. Section 3(2) deﬁnes the expression "act". It needs no change. 3.4. Section 3(3) reads thus: "ai'ﬁdavit" shall include aﬂirmation and declaration in the case of persons by law allowed to aﬁirrn or declare instead of swearing. The deﬁnition is inaccurate, because it seems to equate "aﬂidavit" and "oath", as the word "oath" is deﬁned also3 in the same terms. What an "affidavit" really means is the written state- ment made on oath (or on a solemn aﬁirmation etc.), and not the aﬂirmation or oath itself. Etyrnologically, the root of the word "aﬂidavit" is the medieval Latin "ﬁdus", which means trust. From this root, the word "aﬁidare" was derived in medieval Latin, and it meant "has stated on oath". From that, the word "affidavit" is derived. Hence, the dictionary meaning of "aﬁidavit" is a written statement conﬁrmed by oath, to be used as judicial proof*. According to Wharton5, "aﬂidavit" is a written statement sworn before a person having authority to adminis- ter an oath. 1. See section 3A (proposed), Para 3 .96, infra. 2. See new section 3A. 3. Section 3(37) . 4. Concise Oxford Dictionary (1964). under "atﬁdavit" page 27. S. Wharton, Law Lexicon (1953), page 38. 14 15 3.5. It may be noted that in England, the practice of taking evidence by aﬁidavits originated if in the Court of Chancery. Following the practice of the civil law, the Court of Chancery, for many p',-agcﬁce. centuries, decided causes upon aﬂidavit evidence, with only occasional oral cross--examination.' For example, the rule in force in Chancery", in 1861, provided that "it shall not be competent for the plaintiff or any defendant to require, by notice or otherwise, that the evidence to be adduced shall be taken orally". As regards oral evidence, for some time, English law allowed only oaths. The position was later altered by statutes, which allowed aﬂirmations3. Even recent English practice indicates that the word "aﬂidavit" is generally used to denote a statement in writing on oath (or on aliirmation) . Thus, the rules of the Supreme Court' provide that every aﬂidavit shall be instituted in the cause or matter in which it is sworn, and that aﬂidavits must be conﬁned to such facts as the witness is able of his own knowledge to prove. These rules also speak of the aﬂidavits being "ﬁled" (in the Registry), prohibit alteration in aﬂidavits except under certain conditions and so on. Similarly, the County Court Rules" provide that aﬁidavits shall be expressed in the first per- son, drawn up in paragraphs and numbered, and made by some person who has knowledge of the facts etc. These provisions are, unfortunately, not noticed by text--book writers on the interpre- tation of statutes when they discuss the meaning of aﬂidavit. The Bankruptcy Rules have simi- lar provisions". The important point to be made is that "aliirmation" and "declaration" primarily denote a substitute for the formality of oath. 3.6. Indian legislative practice also regards "aﬂidavit" as referring to the written statement Indian "on oath" etc., and not to the oath or aﬁ'irmation. In our procedural codes,--for example, practice. in the Code of Civil Procedure 7-----"aﬂidavit" means not the process or ceremony (oath or aﬂirmation) but the document which is on oath or aﬁirmation. In the Code of Criminal Proce- dure, 1898, section 539, both the words "aﬂidavit" and "aﬂirmation" were used, but in the new Code", only the word "affidavit" is used, in conformity with the draft suggested in the Law Com- missiou's Report". 3.7. In the Oaths Act , in the provision" conferring power to Oaths Act administer oaths or aﬂirmation for the purpose of aﬂidavit, the language used (so far as is material), is as fo1lows:-- ". . .any court, Judge, magistrate or person may administer oaths and afﬁrmations for the purpose of aliidavits, if empowered in this beha1f---- (a) by the High Court, in respect of affidavits, for the purpose of judicial proceed- ings ; or (b) by the State Government, in respect of other allidavits." Under the same Act", a witness, interpreter or juror may, instead of making an oath, make an aﬂirmation. liorms of oath and aflirmation are also given in the Schedule to the Act , read with section 6 . '1 his discussion is intended to show that the word "aﬂirmation", in the majority of Indian statutes refers usually to the formality substituted for the word "oath". Hence, the Word "alﬁrmation" is not appropriate to denote the writing. 1. Best, Law of Evidence (1922), page 102, paragraph 118. . Chancery Consolidated Orders, 1861, Order 19, rule 3, quoted in Best, Law of Evidence (1922), page 102, footnote. ' . The principal Acts relevant to aﬂirmations are the Oaths Acts, 1888 and 1961. Eng. . Order 38, rules 2 and 3, R.S.C. (Eng.) . Order 20, rule 19, County Court Rules (Eng.) . Bankruptcy Rules, 1952, Rules 55-60 (Eng.) . Order 19, rule 1, Code of Civil Procedure , 1908. . Section 297, Cr. P.C., 1974. 9. Law Commission, 41st Report, Vol. 1, page 355, para. 46.4. 10. Section 3(2) , Oaths Act, 1969. 11. Section 5 , Oaths Act, 1969 (Central Act 44 of 1969). I0 OO\1O\LII-1&9' Recommendation Section 3(3A) -- deﬁnition of 'aircraft' (New). Section 3(4) --:- 'barrister'. Section 3(5) "British India." Section 3 (6) "British possession". Section 3 (7) "Central Act". Section 3 (8) Deﬁnition of "Central Government". Section 3 (9) "Chapter." Section 3 ( 10) "Chief Controlling Revenue Authority". Section 3(10A) Deﬁnition of "Clause" (new). 16 3.8. We accordingly recommend a re-draft of the deﬁnition to indicate~the meaning accura- tely, on the following lines :-- REVISED SECTION 3(3) (3) "ct[ﬁ:lttviz" shall mean a statement in writing purporting to be Cl statement of facts, signed by the per.n.m malting it and confirmed by him by oat ." 3.9. The Act does not deﬁne the expression "aircral't", which is now frequently used in Central Acts. It is necessary to deﬁne it in the General Clauses Act . Section 2(1) of the Indian Aircraft Act, 1934, provides that "aircraft" means "any machine which can derive support in the atmosphere from reactions of the air, and includes balloons, whether ﬁxed or free, airships, kites, gliders and ﬂying machines." Section 2(i) of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, is in the same terms. The Indian Carriage by Air Act, 1934 does not contain any deﬁnition of "aircraft". Section 4(ii) of the Air Force Act, 1950, deﬁnes "aircraft" as including "aeroplanes, balloons, kite balloons. airships, gliders or other machines for ﬂying." We recommend that on the lines of the deﬁnition in the lndian'Aircrat't Act, 1934, a definition of 'aircraft' should be inserted in the General Clauses Act . It will be as follows:-- (3A) "at'rcra,t't" shall mean any machine which can derive support in the atmosphere from reactions of the air, and shall include balloons, whether fixed or free, airships, kites, gliders and flying machines. 3.10. Section 3(4) deﬁnes the expression "barrister". It needs no change. 3.11. Section 3(5) deﬁnes the expression "British India". It needs no change. 3.12. Section 3(6) deﬁnes the expression "British possession". It needs no change. 3.13. Section 3(7) deﬁnes the expression "Central Act". It needs no change. 3.14. In the deﬁnition of "Central Government", in section 3(8) , we propose no change. 3.15. Section 3(9) deﬁnes the expression "Chapter". It needs no change. 3 16. no change. Section 3 ( I 0) deﬁnes the expression "Chief Controlling Revenue Authority". It needs 3.17. A new deﬁnition of the expression "clause" is proposed to be added. Just as the expression "section" and "sub--section" have been deﬁned in the existing Act', it would be convenient to deﬁne the expression "clause" as well. This will standardise the use, of these devices also. It will be as follows :-- Sectfon 3(10A) New "(10A) 'clause' shall mean---- (a) £1 sub-division of the sub-section in which the word occurs. or (b) where there is no sub-section in the section, a sub--division of the section in which the word occurs." 1. Section 3(54) and 3(6l) . b~ 17 3.18. In section 3(11) , which contains the deﬁnition of "Collector", the expression Section "Presidency Towns" should be replaced by a speciﬁc mention of the three cities (Bombay, ~~C0"ect0,v_ Madras and Calcutta). An amendment is recommended for the purpose. The revised clause should be as follows : Revised section 3 ( I I) 3(l1) "Collector" shall mean. . .the chief oﬁicer--in--charge of the revenue adminis- tration of a district. and shall include the Collector of C(l/('IlIf(l, Madras' or Bombay : Section 3 ( 12) "Colony". Section 3 ( 13) 3.19. Section 3(l2) deﬁnes the expression "Colony". It needs no change. 3.20. Section 3 (]3) deﬁnes the expression "commencement". Certain points as to the date of commencement are discussed later} It needs no change. 3.21. Section 3 (/4) deﬁnes the expression "Commissioner". It needs no change. section 3 (1 ) "Commisioner". Section 3 (15) "Commissioner". 3.23. Section 3(l6) deﬁnes the expression "Consular Ofﬁcer". There has been an inter- Section 3(16) national Convention on the subject. In the light of the provisions of the relevant convention'~', we OC;§(';':l'_'.l_"' recommend that the expression 'consular officer' should be re--deﬁned as follows3 2 3.22. Section 3(l5) deﬁnes the expression "Constitution". It needs no change. "Consular Officer" shall mean any person entrusted with the exercise of consular functions, irrespective of his designation, and shall include Consul--General, Consul, Vice- Consul and Consular Agent." 3.24. A deﬁnition of the expression "daughter" is proposed to be added, as a useful pro- Sectiqrt 3(16A) . . ._ . . . . ' , . . . Deﬁnition of vision, on the lines of the existing deﬁnition of son. The adoption of daughters is permitted «damzhte,» (new, in certain cases.' It is felt that section l3(I), under which words of the masculine gender are taken as including the faminine gender, may not necessarily have the effect of extending the deﬁnition of 'son' to the construction of the word 'daughter'. We, therefore, recommend insertion of the following new deﬁnition. Section 3 ( 16A) (New) (16A) "daughter", in the case of any one whose personal law permits adoption, shall include an adopted daughter:-" 3.25. A deﬁnition of the expression "day" is proposed to be added. Such a deﬁnition will Section 3(16B) be similar to the existing deﬁnition of "month". The proposed deﬁnition follows the existing .I3f:,ﬁy'7~'"°n of statutory precedents", and will be as follows : Section 3(I6B) (New) (16B) "day" shall mean a period of twenty--four hours beginning or inid-nielit. 3.26. A deﬁnition of the expression "diplomatic officer" is desirable. on the pattern of the Section 3(16C) deﬁnition of "consular officer" in section 3(16) . as proposed to be amended. It may be noted ;)%liP1°§P"'l" CCI' . 1. See discussion under section 5 in Chapt--er 4, infra. 2. Vienna convention on Consular Relations, 1963, Article 1(1) (d). 3. The draft is based on the Ministry of External Aﬁ"airs' letter (S. No. 207) No. D--23l9,"L&T/63 (No. 4/45! (2) 63 dated 6-3-1963, to the Law Commission. 4. See sections 7 and 8 , Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956, (76 of 1956), 5. This amendment should not apply to existing Acts. See section 3A (proposed). 6. (a) Section 2 , Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948). (b) Section 2 , Weekly Holidays Act, 1942, (18 of 1942). (c) Section 2 , Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1952). (d) Section 2 , Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952). "Commencement". 18 that there is an international Convention' on the subject. In the light of the relevant conveIItion,2 we recommend that the expression 'diplomatic olliccr' should be deﬁned as follows: Section 3(I6C) (New) (]6C) "diplomatic officer" shall mean a member of the staff of a diplomatic mission having diplomatic rank, and includes an ambassador, //n'gl1 commiss1'oner, €HV0.\', 77157155187 and charge dnﬂaires ; Section 3(17) 3 .27. The deﬁnition of "District Judge", in section 307), is as follows :-- District ' ._ Ind" "District Judge" shall mean the Judge of a principal Civil Court of Original jurisdic- tion. but shall not include a High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extra-ordinary original civil jurisdiction." This deﬁnition uses the words "shall mean", and not the words "includes" or the words "shall include". Therefore, if the definition, as it is worded, is taken literally, no one except "the judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction" can come within it. The use of the article "the" before the word "Judge" (in the deﬁnition) is signiﬁcant. It has a specifying or particularis-- ing effect, as opposed to the indeﬁnite and generalising force of "a", and denotes that it is not any Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction that can be termed as a District Judge, but that only the sole presiding Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction can be called a District Judge. This was the View taken in a Madhya Bharat case.3 gaﬁiaw as 3.28. The contrary view has, however, been taken in an Assam case.' holding that "District "District Judge" in section 7(3) (b) of the Industrial Disputes Act includes an Additional District Judge ]"d3°"' by virtue of this clause.-' 9 Of course, the deﬁnition of the term "District Judge" cannot be used for ﬁnding out the meaning of the term "District court."" But, where the term "district judge" is used, diﬁiculty is created by the conflict of views referred to above. ggfyzuégndgigrwra 3.29. The question, therefore, usually arises whether a statutory provision which confers in',-¢1_,,¢,-on to ' powers on a "District Judge" refers to the District Judge as a persona designata, or, whether it 3133:" refers to him as the presiding oﬂicer of the court. In the latter case, the usual provisions applicable to the district court apply. According to Osborn's Concise Law Dictionaryi, 8 a persona designata is "a person who is pointed out or described as an individual, as opposed to a person ascertained as a member of a class, or as ﬁlling a particular character." When a special or local law provides for an adjudication to be made by a constituted Court---- that is, by a Court not created by a special or local law, but to an existing Court----the special or local law, in fact generally enlarges the ordinary jurisdiction of such a court." -Thus, where a special or local statute refers to a constituted court as a court, and does not refer to the presiding officer of that court, then -the reference cannot be said to be a persona designata. But the reverse proposition," that where the reference is to the presiding ofﬁcer of a court, it is intended to be taken as referring to him as a persona designata and not as a court, may or may not be true. 1. Contrast the deﬁnition in the Diplomatic Officers (Oaths and Fees) etc. Act, 1948 (41 of l948)and section 2 .of the Special Marriage Act . 1954 (43 of 1954). 2. Vienna Convention on Consular Relations, 1963. Article l(l)(d). 3. Mangharam v. K. B. Kher, A.I.R. 1956 MB. 183, 187. 4. G. C. Bezbarna v. State, A.l.R. I954 Assam 161, 165, para 9. S. For the recommendation relvant to the deﬁnition, see infra para 3 .30. 6. D.C.S. Bureau v. United Concern, A.I.R. 1967 Mad. 381, 384, para 6 (reviews cases) (Case under section 62(1) , Copyright Act) 7. Osborn, Concise Law Dictionary, 4th Ed. 8. Rant Chandra Aggarwal V. State of U.P., A.l.R. 1966 S.C. 1888. 9. Ram Chandra Aggarwal V. State of U.P., A.l.R. 1966 S.C. 1888. 10 See Bimla Rani V. B.M. Finance, AIR 1972 All. 242, 245. . -.¢-- _......___. 19 3.30. In order to avoid doubts' on the points discussed above, and to resolve the conﬂict of views, it is desirable to provide that the expression "district judge" does not include an additional judge of the district court. We recommend an amendment as follows :-- Revised Section 3 ( 17) (17) "District Judge" shall mean the Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdic- tion. but shall not include- (a) An Additional Judge of such Court, or (b) the High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extra--ordinary civil jurisdiction. 3.31. We now come to the deﬁnition of "document". The deﬁnition of "document" will be better understood if four elements are studied separately. The ﬁrst _is the concept indicated by the word "matter", which may be described as the "mental element". The matter recorded on the document here means an idea,---what is regarded in Copyright law as the proper sub- ject-matter of copyright. The second element of the deﬁnition is indicated by the words "written etc.". This may be called the manual (or mechanical) element; and coupled with this is the third element of symbols, indicated by letters, ﬁgures or marks. These symbols have mean- ing only because they are intended to be used, or may be used, for the purpose of recording the idea represented by the ﬁrst element. Finally, there is the substance upon which these pro- cesses are brought to bear, i.e., upon which the mental element is recorded (by mechanical means) through symbols. This last one is the material--a purely physical object. It is a defect in the present deﬁnition that it deﬁnes a "document" in terms of what has been described above as the mental element. The ordinary meaning of the expression "docu- ment" is the material or substance upon which (as explained above) the other processes operate. Notwithstanding the fact that a similar defect is found to exist in the deﬁnition in the Indian Penal Code, and in the Evidence Act, and notwithstanding also the fact that the present deﬁ- nition has been there for almost a century, we consider it proper to modify it so as to bring it nearer to the reality. The starting point for the deﬁnition should be the substance. 3.32. With reference to some of the processes enumerated above} certain observations. are in order. So far as the word "matter" denoting the intellectual or mental element, is concerned, nothing further need be said. So far as the manual process of recording the matter is concerned, the present wording is somewhat narrow, inasmuch as it does not cover the act of inscribing. It is considered that when a matter is inscribed on metal or stone or even on paper, the process can better __be called "inscribed" rather than "written" etc., though, perhaps, the word "expressed" might cover it. The illustrations to the deﬁnition in the Indian Evidence Act show that such inscriptions are "documents". The word "written" does not occur in the Evidence Act or in the Penal Code; it can, however, be retained here, as useful. The word was added in the General Clauses Act at the Select Committee stage. The deﬁnition of "writing" may also be seen. In addition to the process of writing, describing etc. speciﬁcally enumerated, the deﬁnition should, in our opinion, be widened to include such new processes as may, or may have already, come into existence for the purpose of recording an idea. These processes could be divided into two classes--(a) processes analogous to writing," etc., and (b) processes not analogous to writing etc. We think that all such other processes should be brought within the fold of the deﬁnition. 3.33. We next come to the third element of a "document", namely, the symbols. Here, the present deﬁnition is conﬁned (at least on one view) to the speciﬁc types of symbols enume- rated therein. We are of the view that this part of the deﬁnition should be widened so as to l. Para 3 .27 and 3.28, supra. 2. Para 3.31, supra. 3. See deﬁnition of "writing." 15 M of Law/744 Recommendation Section 3 ( 1 8) deﬁ- nition of "document". Four processes. Stephen': deﬁnition. The words "which is intended etc." examined. Admis' sibility of tape- recordings. to include (a) symbols analogous to those which are already mentioned, and (b) methods which are not analogous to symbols, but which can come into existence later or may have come into existence already. No doubt, this last mentioned category is wide, but we have particularly in mind Cinematography ﬁlms and tape--records1 (these are merely examples). Incidentally, we may mention that both the words "figure" and "marks", used in the present deﬁnition, are ambiguous. If only the numerical ﬁgures are intended, then paintings would be left out. If, again, only visible marks conveying the idea by themselves (and without further eﬁord) are intended, then mechanical recordings are left out. What the Penal Code describes as "visible representations"? should be covered.3 as also what may be called acoustic represen- tations. Finally, the substance upon which all these processes take place should, as we have already indicated} be the starting point for the deﬁnition. 3.34. Stephen's diﬁnition in his Digest of Evidence5 is simpler. He deﬁnies "document" as any substance having any matter expressed or described upon it by marks capable of being read. The deﬁnition is useful as making it clear that the substance constitutes the document. The deﬁnition by Stephen is, however, narrow, in one respect. It lays emphasis on what can be read. Stephen was, perhaps, thinking of the conventional method of writing, which is the normal device adopted by literate persons to communicate their ideas--including, of course, printing. ' 3.35. So much as regards the principal elements of the deﬁnition of document. Now, a verbal point may be mentioned. The words "which is intended to be used or which may be used for the purpose of recording that matter", in the existing deﬁnition raise one question. Are these words to be read with---- (i) 'matter', or (ii) 'letters, ﬁgures or marks', or (iii) 'means'. (iv) 'substance' ? The ﬁrst interpretation would involve repetition of 'matter', which makes it meaningless. The second interpretation is a plausible one, but the, the plural "letters" etc..goes ill with the singular "which is". The third also suﬂers from the same defect, as "means" has been used - in the plural in the deﬁnition. The fourth is in harmony with the singular. Since it is the ex- pression "wliic'.i is" which has caused difﬁculty, it is proposed to make it plural, and to link it up with "means". The means could be used, or are intended to be used. -for recording the. idea. 3.36. The (Indian) Official Secrets Act, 1923 , deﬁnes "document" as including 'a part of document. But such a clariﬁcation appears to be unnecessary in this Act. 1 "' 7' 3.37. As regards tape--recording,"* we may note that they have now been in commercial use for many years, and they have been held by the Supreme Court to be admissible in evi- dence7 in several cases. The question whether they are "documents" was not at issue inthose cases." . As to ta.pe-record", see para 3 .37, infra. . Sections 124A , 153A , 499 , I.P.C. . See also para 3 .38 infra. . Para 3 .31, supra. . Stephen's Digest of Evidence, Article 1. . Para 3 .33, supra. (a) Pratap Sinh v. State of Punjab, (1964) 2 S.C.R. 733 A.l.R. 1964 S.C. 72, 86, para 15. (b) R.M. Malkani v. State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1973 S.C. 157 (reviews cases). (a) Yusuﬂalli v. State ofMaharashtra, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 147 (V. 55) ; (1967) 3 S.C.R. 720. ' (b) Manindra Nath v. Biswanath, 67 Cal. W.N. 191. (c) Rup Chand v. Mahabir Prasad, A.I.R. 1956 Punj. 173. 90 \lO\U'-hi'-'?\7*-' J: 21 In Australia, the problem was exhaustively argued in R. v. Travers} and the New South Court'-' of Criminal Appeal there held that a record of a conversation (or of any other event) was just as admissible as an accousztc reproduction, and that the rules which related to the supp- lementing of the senses by the use of scientiﬁc instruments should be applied to recordings of the type in question. From this decision, the High Court refused special leave to appeal.3 3.38. In England, section 6(1), Evidence Act, 1938 provides that "document" includes books, maps, plans, drawings and photographs. Although the deﬁnition is plainly not exhaustive, a view has been expressed that it is doubtful whether a tape--recording, or a computer print-out, would be held to be a document within the Act. The Criminal Evidence Act, 1965, under which "document" includes "any device by means of which information is recorded or stored", is more up to date. In India, in the Press Emergency Powers Act,' it isexpressly stated that "document" in- cludes also any painting, drawing or photograph or other visible representation. 37.39. Finally, it may also be useful to add an Explanation that the means employed for forming the letters etc. should be immaterial. 3.40. In the light of the above discussion, the following re-draft of the deﬁnition of "docu- ment" is recommended:--- 'document' shall include any substance having any matter written, expressed, inscribed, described or otherwise recorded upon it by means of letters, ﬁgures or marks or by any other means, or by more than one of these means which are intended to be used or which may be used for the purpose of recording that matter. ExpIz.mati(m.----It is immaterial by what means the letters, ﬁgures or marks are formed." 1 3.4]. Section 3(l9) deﬁnes an "enactment". The decided cases on this expression, which occurs in several sections of the Act,5 are fairly numerous. For example, it has been held that an "enactment" would include any Act (or a provision contained therein) made by the Union Parliament or the State Legislature." Again, since "enactment" is deﬁned to include also any provision of an Act, section 6 would apply to a case where not only the entire Act is repealed, but also where any provision of an Act is repca1ed.7 3.4lA. The expression "enactment" occurs at several places in the Some of the important sectionss using the expression are as folIows:-- General Clauses Act . Section» 6--Repeal of an enactment---effect of. Section 8- --Construction of references to repealed enactments. Section 12- -Duty to be taken pro rata in enactments. Section 26- --Provision as to offence punishable under two or more enactments. l. R. V. Travers (1958) S.R. (N.S.W.) 85. 2. See--(a) 31 Aust. L.J. 895 ; (b) 37 Aust. L.J. 145. 3. See (1957) 98 C.L.R. 674. V 4. Section 2(6), Press Emergency Powers Act, 1931 (repealed). 5. See, infra, para 3.4lA. 6. State afPunjab Sukh Deo Sarup Gupta A.I.R. 1970 SC 1661, 1942, para 3, aﬂirming A I R 1965 Punj 399 7. Godhra Electricity Co. v. Samalal, A.I.R. 1967 Guj. 772, 776, para 6. ' ' ' 8. The list is illustrative only. Recom- mendation. Section 3 , ( 19)- "enactment". Sections containing the expres- sion "enact- ment". Section 3 ( 1 9) - "enactment" (application to repeal) . Section 8 and "Enactment". - instruments shall be construed as references to the re-enacted one. 22 Questions of the application of the deﬁnition of "enactment" in section 3(l9) can arise in relation to all these section. A discussion of such questions in relation to two important sec- ticns----see1ions 6 and 8--is offered below. 3.42. The operation of the deﬁnition of "enactment" in relation to the repeal of a law (sec- tion 6 of the Act) may be illustrated by analysing certain frequently recurring situations con- cerning repeal. ~ (a) A Central Act may, for example, repeal a State Act} It may repeal or have the effect of repealing, (because of the generality of the words employed), a law in a Native State which was not described as an "Act". This situation arose, for example, when the Special Marriage Act, 1954 , repealed not only the Special Marriage Act, 1872, but also "any law corresponding to the Special Marriage Act, 1872, in force in any Part B State" etc.' (b) A Central Act may, similarly, have the etfect of repealing a Portuguese or French law because of the generality of the words employed. (c) Again, a Central Act may repeal a British Statute applicable to India. Many of these were repealed in 1960, on the recommendations of the Law Commission.3 A few still survive. (d) Then, a Central Act may repeal a State Act as in force in a Union Territory by virtue of the notiﬁcation made by the competent authority under the relevant law. These cases do not exhaust all the situations. But the point intended to be made is that in most of them, the law repealed is one which does not ﬁnd speciﬁc mention in the deﬁnition of "enactment" in the General Clauses Act . 3.43. The approach adopted by the draftsman with reference to repeal (and savings requi- site on repeal) can also be usefully illustrated. Sometimes, for example, the draftsman may assume that the repeal section ( section 6 ) applies to the situation.' Sometimes, the draftsman provides that the provisions of section 6 "shall also apply to the repeal of the corresponding law as if such corresponding law had been an enactment".5 Sometimes, where section 6 would not deﬁnitely apply, because the language used is not "repeal", but the formula used is, "cease to be in force", the draftsman merely introduces a brief saving as respects "anything done or any action taken" under the law which is to cease to have effect." Sometimes, the draftsman provides not merely for the application of section 6 , but also for the application of the whole General Clauses Act , by providing that "the provisions of the General Clauses Act, 1897 , shall apply to the repeal of the said Act as if the said Act were a Central Act."" Sometimes, the draftsman reproduces almost the entire substance of section 6 , General Clauses Act.3 3.44. The matter 'can also be considered in relation to section 8 . Section 8 provides that where an enactment is repealed and re-enacted, references to the repealed enactment in other The expression "enactment" in section 8 came up for consideration before the Supreme Court." The material facts were these: Under the East Punjab General Sales Tax Act, 1948 , section 6 read with Schedule B. entry 37, the following goods were exempt from tax:-- "All goods on which duty is, or may be, levied under the Punjab Excise Act, 1914 ." . For example, see section 25 ! 1), Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1964). . Section 51(1) , Special Marriage Act, 1954. . Fifth Report of the Law Commission. . For example, section 25(1) , Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954). . Section 51(3) , Special Marriage Act, 1954. . Section 26 , Comptroller & Auditor General, etc. Act, 1971 (56 of 1971). . Section 45(2) , Haryana and Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1970 (16 of 1970) [repealing a Punjab Act.] . For example, section 87, Andaman and Nicobar Co-operative Societies Regulation, 1973 (3 of 1973), [repealing the Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 in relation to Andaman and Nicobar]. 9. State ofPunjab v. Sukh Dev Sarup Gupta, AIR. 1970 S.C. 1641, 1642, para 3. W\l0\<.IIJ>DJI~J"' ~44 23 In 1955, Parliament enacted the Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties) Act . Section 21 of the Act repealed any State law corresponding to the Act, in force in any State. The question arose whether the exemption from sales tax could be claimed in respect of goods on which duty was levied under the Central Act of 1955. The argument of the State was that since the exemption in Punjab Act of 1948 referred to the " Punjab Excise Act . 1914", which had now been repealed, no exemption could be claimed. The State further argued that section 8 of the General Clauses Act (relating to construction of references to re-enacted Act) did not apply, because the Act repealed was not a Central Act and, therefore, was not an "enactment". The Supreme Court rejected this argument and held that section 3(l9) of the General Clauses Act did not contain any limitation that it would apply only to Central Acts. 3.45. Since an Ordinance is "promulgated" and not "enacted", the Rangoon High Court Ordinances observed' that an Ordinance is not an "enactment", and the High Court felt "considerable hesita-- ¢a$iﬁ';'ilIl,'"8 tion" in holding that the repeal of an Ordinance would attract the usual provisions regarding "enactment". repeal of enactments. It has now been held that the expression "enactment" includes an Ordinance, so that section 8 applies where a Central Act repeals and re-enacts an Ordinance made by the President.' 3.46. In order that the deﬁnition of "enactment" may indicate more accurately what its true scope is, it needs to be re-drafted. The deﬁnition should be framed in wide terms, so as to d,f,'§§,'f";';',;, include (i) Central Acts, as well as all (ii) State and Provincial?' Acts, and (iii) Acts of former deﬁnition of Indian' States, and also (iv) All Regulations and Ordinances, whether made after or before "°na°'m°m"' the Constitution." It should also cover laws of French etc. possessions," which were passed when those possessions were not part of India. Speciﬁc mention of Regulations of the Bombay etc. Code should be omitted, as unnecessary at the present day. We, therefore, recommend a re-draft of the deﬁnition of "enactment" as follows :-- Revised section 3 ( 19) 3( 19) "enactment" shall include any law passed or made by any legislature or other authority acting in a legislative capacity, and shall also include any provision contained in any such law, but shall not include a statutory instrument. 3.47. Section 3(20) deﬁnes the expression "father", and needs no change. Sem 3 20 * "fath'e)i"". ( ) Section 3(2l) 3 .49. Section 3(22) deﬁnes the expression "good faith". It needs no change.' gﬁcnzincigl 2°?' " tron .( ") 3.50. Section 3 (2.3) deﬁnes the expression "Government". It needs no change. siofignfgigg) ' "G g'. 3.51. Section 3(24) deﬁnes the expression "Government securities". It needs no change. SCC(f).l.'t")eIll.n;l:;l;t) "Governnient 3.52. (a) The existing deﬁnition of "High Court" does not cover criminal proceedings. It §::,t:§('25 may be noted that the General Clauses Bill of 1897 (as introduced) contained a separate "High Court)'. clause for criminal proceedings also. But the Select Committee rejected" this change, stating that 3.48. Section 3(2l) deﬁnes the expression "ﬁnancial year". It needs no change. 1. S. K. Roy Chowdhury v. The King, A.I.R. 1941 Rangoon 1, 4 (Roberts C.J.). 2. Hareobhai v, State, A.I.R. 1967 Guj. 227, 245, para 29. 3. Cf. para.3 .42(a) supra. 4. Cf. para. 3 .42(b) supra. 5. Cf. para. 3.45 supra. 6. Cf. para. 3 .42(c) and (d) supra. 7. For a full discussion as to good faith' See A.I.R. 1969 Bom. 127. 8. Gazette of India, 6th March, 1897 Part V, page 77 (Report of the Select Committee). Section 3(26) "Immovable property: Section 3(27) "Imprisonment." Section 3 (28) "India". Section 3(29) "Indian law". 24 the arrangements relating to the Recorder of Rangoon and Criminal Courts in Burma _were complicated. This reason does not hold good now. (b) The deﬁnition in section 4 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, provided that where, with reference to criminal proceedings, no High Court is established in any part of India, the expression "High Court" means such oﬂicer as the State Government may appoint him in that behalf. This provision, however was obsolete. We think that there is no need to exclude criminal proceedings from the deﬁnition at this stage. Also, instead of deﬁning a "High Court" as the highest court of appeal etc. and then excluding the Supreme Court by express words, it is preferable to re-draft the deﬁnition so as to include the court of Judicial Commissioners wherever they exist. (c) In the light of the above points, a revised deﬁnition of the expression "High Court'? is recommended as below: ' Revised section 3(25) 3(25) "High Court", used with reference to civil or criminal proceedings, shall meanitlié High Court or the Court of Judicial Commissioner having jurisdiction over the part of India which the Act or Regulation containing the expression operates; 3.53. Section 3(26) deﬁnes the expression "immovable property." It needs nochange: 3.54. Section 3(27) deﬁnes the expression "imprisonment". It needs no change. 3.55. Section 3(28) deﬁnes the expression "India". It needs no change. 3.56. Regarding section 3(29) , which deﬁnes "Indian Law", there is a suggestion' to be considered. Sub--section (l) of section 4A of the General Clauses Act, 1897, makes applicable to "Indian laws" certain deﬁnitions contained in the General Clauses Act . The term "Indian law" is deﬁned in clause (29) of section 3 of the Act as follows-- " 'Indian law' shall mean any Act, Ordinance, Regulation, Rule, order, byelaw or other instrument which before the commencement of the Constitution had the force of lain in any province of India or part thereof, or thereafter has the force of law in any Part A State or Part C State or part thereof, but does not include any Act of Parlia- ment of the United Kingdom or Order in Council, rule or other instrument made under such Act." " ' " It will be apparent from the above deﬁnition (of the expression "Indian law") thatit will apply only to laws in force in any area, which immediately before 1st November was included in a part A State or Part C State, but not to laws in force in any area which, immediately before that date, was comprised, in a Part B State. Now, in almost all Madras Acts, expressions such as "Central Government", "State Government", "Oﬂicial Gazette", "High Court" etc. are used with-- out speciﬁcally deﬁning them in the respective Madras Acts, and these expressions will, -by 'virtue of sub--section (1) of section 4A, have the meanings assigned to them in the General Clauses Act . The question arises whether the deﬁnitions of various expressions enumerated in' section 4A(l) will apply to a Madras Act extended to the Kanyakumari district and the Shenoottah taluk of the Tirunelveli district (which district and taluk were immediately before the 1st November, 1956, comprised in a Part B State, namely, Travancore-Cochin.) As the position in this respect is not very clear, the suggestion is that the position shouldube clariﬁed.' 3.57. We have given thought to the suggestion} but we think that the better course, at this stage, would be for each State Legislature concerned to deal with the matter and .to. make 1. Suggestion of the Government of the (erstwhile) State of Madras. 2. Para 3 .56, supra. 25s a suitable provision for the interpretation of laws of a (former) Part A State extended to the area of a (former) Part B State. In so far as these laws relate to matters within the State List, an amendment to be made in the General Clauses Act cannot apply to those laws. As y regards matters in the Concurrent List, not many State laws would have been extended to those areas, because, on most matters included in the Concurrent List (e.g. registration, succession, procedure and the like), the position is that under the Part B States Laws Act or similar other laws, the relevant Central Acts on various subjects now extend to those areas, and the General Clauses Act, 1897 applies to those Central Acts for interpreting those Central Acts. Even as regards other maters in the Concurrent List, where the relevant Central Acts are not extended, no serious diﬂiculty should arise because the analogy of the General Clauses Act can be invoked. 3.58. Section 3 (3.0) deﬁnes the expresion "Indian State". It needs no change. Section 3(30) "Indian State". 3.59. Several points require discussion regarding the deﬁnition of "local authority" in section 'Slectzign 3(3I) OC 3 (31 ) - authority". . (1) Speciﬁc mention of Cantonment Board should be made. (2) "Municipal Corporations" should be added. l But it appears unnecessary to add speciﬁcally "municipality" or "local Board" and other authorities etc. referred to in the Bombay General Clauses Act or in the Constitution, Seventh Schedule, State List, item 5. These may be left to be covered by the residuary words. Even though a municipal committee may have a corporate personality, ordinarily the two (corporation and the committee) are understood to be distinct from each other, and their respective structure, powers and other matters indicate the difference in status. The distinction between "corporation" and "committee" corresponds to actual reality. (3) The words referring to "body of Port Commissioners" may be retained. In some places (e.g. Bombay), there are Port Trustees. But it is considered unnecessary to mention them' speciﬁcally. (4) Regarding the words "other authority" .....", in the deﬁnition, it has been held , that'-' a body of Port Commissioners is a local authority, irrespective of whether it controls or is entrusted with "the control and management of a municipal" etc. fund or not. It was observed that it is only in the case of other authorities that the requirement expressed by these words is to be satisﬁed. (5) This part of the deﬁnition should be re--drafted, by taking in all authorities entrusted with local self-government or village administration. (6) It has been suggested that the definition should include "any authority declared to , be a local authority under any enactment". But this does not appear to be necessary. Such declarations are not frequent, at least in Central Acts. .(7) It may be noted that village Panchayats have been held to be local authorities. We recommend a re-draft incorporating the above points on the following lines :-- Revised section 3 (3I ) 3(31) "local authority" shall mean a municipal corporation or committee, a district - board. a cantonment board or a body of port commissioners, or any other authority constituted for the purpose of local self-government or village administration; 3.60. Section 3 (_ 32) deﬁnes the expression "Magistrate". It needs no change. V section 3(32) _ V' 'V: V V' 7' ''iv" - uhiagistrateev. 1. Contrast section 3(27) of the Bombay General Clauses Act, 1904. 2. Official Assignee v. Trustees ofthe Port Trust, Madras, A.I.R. 1936 Mad. 789, 791. Section 3 (3 3 )- "master-". Section -3 ( 34) «- "merged territories". Section 3 (3 5 ) - "month". 26 3.61. Section 3(33) deﬁnes the expression "master". It needs no change. 3.62. Section 3(34) deﬁnes the expression "merged territories". It needs no change. 3.63. The Act deﬁnes a "month" as a month reckoned according to the British calendar. The deﬁnition is inaccurate. The word "British" should, in this deﬁnition, be replaced by the word "Gregorian".1 "British" is not an accurate description.' I The English, Australian and Canadian Act deﬁne a "month" simply as a calendar month. But it may be noted that there are no other calendars in vogue in these countries. It may be noted that the calendar now used for civil purposes throughout the world' is called the Gregorian Calendar} after Pope Gregory XIII, who introduced it in the 16th century. The immediate predecessor of the Gregorian calendar was the Julian calendar (called after Julius Caesar). That calendar itself has a history, and can be traced ultimately to Egypt ' Throughout the Republican period, in Rome, the year normally contained 355 days, the months being 29 or 30 days in length. An additional month, consisting sometimes of 27 days and sometimes of 28 days, was inserted, when considered necessary, after 23 February, the ﬁve last days of February being then omitted. The additional month was generally inserted in alternate years, but the decision as to when it should be inserted lay with the pontiﬁces, The pontiﬁces often used to manipulate unscrupulously the lunar calendar to their own advantage: if it was desired to prolong or shorten the term of oﬂice of a magistrate or to arrange an election some time that appeared favourable, the calendar was adjusted to suit. It was to end such abuses that Julius Caesar decided upon a reform of the calendar ; at the time of his pontiﬁcate, the seasons had shifted about two months from their proper positions. He called in the assistance of the Greek astronomer, Sosigenes of Alexandria; and the calendar was modiﬁed into what is very much like its present form. (Sosigenes himself took the idea of a solar calendar from Egypt). The lunar month was thrown over completely. The normal year was to contain 365 days. an additional day being inserted every fourth year, thus giving an average length of the year of 3651» days, in close agreement with the length of the tropical year. The calendar year now became, for the ﬁrst time, purely solar, and there was no tendency for the seasons to drift about. 3.64. The Julian method provided a calendar whose length closely approximated to the tropical year. Its device of 'intercalation' was also convenient. But the basic defect was that, in taking a period of 365!:days as the length of the tropical year, it over-estimated this length by a little more than 11 minutes 15 seconds or, more exactly, by 0.0073 days. Thus, although the error amounted only to one whole day in 128 years, it was constantly increasing, and over a long time became troublesome. This deﬁciency showed up in due course, so that further reform became imperative because of criticism by astronomers. The Vatican made several unsuccessful efforts to reform the calendar. In the 16th century, after further criticism, the Vatican again made an effort to reform matters, and this time it was successful. Pope Gregory XIII approached the governments of the principal states of the Holy Roman empire, and all agreed to accept his alterations. He then promulgated a new calendar, known as the Gregorian (or New Style) calendar, in a brief issued in March, 1582. It was adopted, in due course, in several other countries. . 3.65. Great Britain took a long time to make the change. It was in 1751 that a Calendar (New Style) Act was passed,' and the Gregorian calendar was thereforth ordered-" to be used for all legal and public business. 1. Com re section 25 of the Limitation Act. 2. Comgame also the deﬁnition in the Jammu and Kashmir General Clauses Act, 1877 (20 of 1877), which uses the word "Gregorian." 3. Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 4, page 611. 4. The Calendar (New Style) Act, 1751. _ _ 5. C. R. Cheuey (Ed.), Handbook of Dates for students of English HlSt0'')' 0945-) 27 In order to substitute "Gregorian", we recommend as follows :-- Section 3(35) --definition of 'month' In section 3(35) . for the word "British", the word "Gregorian" shall be substituted. 3.66. Section 3(36) deﬁnes "movable property", and needs no change. 3.67. Section 3(37) deﬁnes "oath" as including a solemn aﬂirmation or declaration in case of persons by law allowed to do so. But it does not provide that the oath should be taken before a competent authority. We recommend that the deﬁnition should be re--drafted as follows so as to bring out this idea : "(37). "Oath" shall mean an oath taken before a competent authority with reference to the Oaths Act, 1969 , or any other law for the time being in force, and shall, in the case of persons by law allowed to aﬂirm or declare instead of swearing, include afﬁrmation or declaration made before a competent authority with reference to that Act or law". 3.68. Section 3(38) deﬁnes the expression "offence". It needs no change. 3.69. and 3.70. Section 3(39) deﬁnes the expression "Official Gazette". It needs no change. 3.71. Section 3(40) deﬁnes the expression "Part". It needs no change. 3.72. Section 3(41) deﬁnes the expression "Part A State". It needs no change . It is useful only for existing Central Acts and Regulations. 3.73. Section 3(42) deﬁnes the expression "person". It needs no change. 3.74. Section 3(43) deﬁnes the expression "Political Agent". It needs no change. 3.75. A deﬁnition of the expression "prescribed" is proposed to be added. It is the usual practice to insert a deﬁnition in each Central Act to the effect that (in that Act), the word "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under that Act. It will be convenient to insert this deﬁnition in the General Clauses Act , so as to shorten the language of Central Acts. Section 3(43A) (New) .3(43A) "prescribed" shall mean prescribed by rules made under the Central Act or Regulation in which the word occurs; 3.76. Section 3(44) deﬁnes the expression "Presidency town". It needs no change. 3.77. Section 3(45) deﬁnes the expression "Province". It needs no change. 3.78. Section 3(46) deﬁnes the expression " Provincial Act ". It needs no change. 3.79. Section 3(47) deﬁnes the expression "Provincial Government". It needs no change. 3.80. A new deﬁnition of the expression "public" is proposed to be added. It follows section 12 of the Indian Penal Code, and section 3(26) Of the Madras General Clauses Act. 1891, but the words "or section" (of the public) have been added in order to make it comprehensive. The new deﬁnition should be as follows 2 15 M of Law/74---5 Section 3 (36) - 'movable property'. Section 3 (37) - "oath". Section 3(38) -- "Offence". Section 3 (39) - "Ofﬁcial Gazette". Section 3(40) ---- "Part". Section 3(41) -- "Part A State". Section 3 (42) --- "person". Section 3 (43 )-- "Political Agent". Section 3 ( 43A ) - Deﬁnition of "prescri bed" (New ) Section 3 (44) ---- "Presidency town". Section 3(45) ---- "Province". Section 3 ( 46 )-- " Provincial Act ". Section 3 (47 )- "Provincial Government". Section 3 ( 47A )--- "public" (New) Section 3(48) --~ "public nuisance". Section 3(49) --- "registered". Section 3 (50) ----- ''Regulation''. Section 3(51) ---- "rule". Section 3(52) -- "schedule". Section 3(53) ---- "Scheduled District". Section 3(54) -- "section". Section 3(55) ---- "ship". Section 3(56) --- "sign". Section 3(57) - "son". Section 3(58) --- "State". Section 3(59) --- "State Act". Section 3 (60 ) -- "State Government". Section 3 (6OA ) - "statutory instrument" (New) . Section 3 (61 )-- "sub-section". Section 3 (62 ) ~- "swear". Section 3 ( 62A) -- "Temporary Act" or "Temporary Regulation". 28 Section 3 (47A) (New) 3(47A) "public" shall include any class or section of the public ,' 3.8]. Section C(18) deﬁnes "public nuisance", and needs no change. 3.82. 3.83. 3.87. 3.88. Section Section . Section . Section . Section Section Section 3 (49) deﬁnes the expression "Re-_zis:cred". and nee-:i.~. no change. 3(50) deﬁnes the expression "Regulation". It needs no change. 3(51) defines the expression "rule". It needs no change. 3(52) deﬁnes the expression "schedule". It needs no change. 3(53) deﬁnes the expression "Scheduled District". It needs no change. 3(54) deﬁnes the expression "section". It needs no change. 3(55) deﬁnes the expression "ship". It needs no change. 3.88A. Section 3(56) deﬁnes the expression "sign". It needs no change. 3888. Section 3(57) deﬁnes the expression 3.88C 3.88D 3.88E 6: as son . It needs no change. . Section 3(58) deﬁnes the expression "State". It needs no change. . Section 3(59) deﬁnes the expression "State Act". It needs no change. . No changes are proposed in the deﬁnition of "State Government", in section 3(60) . 3.88F. A deﬁnition of "statutory instrument" is proposed to be inserted', as a useful The new deﬁnition should be as follows: provision. 3(6OA) "statutory instrument" 3.89. Section 3(61) deﬁnes the expression "sub--section". 3.90. Section 3(62) defines the expression 'swear". 3.91. The expression "temporary Act" or few proposed sections," Section 3 ( 60A) (New) shall mean a rule, ztotiﬁmzion, b_re--law, order. scheme, form or other instrument made under an enactment; It needs no change. lt needs no change. "temporary Regulation" has been used in a and it is proposed to insert a deﬁnition of that expression in section '3. The new deﬁnition should be as follows: 3(6 2A) tion, whether made be is to cease to have eﬂect or cease to 0 "Temporary Act" or temporary Regulation" Section 3 (62.4) (New) shall mean a Central Act or Regula- fore or after the commencement of the Constitution, which perate on a particular day or on the expiration of a particular period or on the happening of a particular event; [Existing section 3(62A) to be renumbered as section 3(62) ] 1. See also Para 12.2 infra. !'J e.g ., section relating to the expiry of temporary Acts (proposed), Chapter 7, in m. x8 29 3.92. Section 3(62A) deﬁnes the expression "Union Territory". It needs no change, except renumbering. The renunibering is required because or the insertion of a new deﬁnition m,u,nm,md as Section 3(62B) -- "Union Territory". Section 3(63) -- "vessel". Section 3(64) ---- "will". Section 3(65) ---- "writing". . . . . . _. ., . . " .. ,, Section 3(66) --- 3.96. In section 3(66) --deﬁnition or the expression year «the existing word British ~~,vca,~~v_. should be replaced by the word "Gregoriaii", which is the accurate word. '1 he revised deﬁnition 'dmcndmﬁﬂl should be as tollows :-- recommended' or' "temporary Act". 3.93. Section 3(63) deﬁnes the expression "vessel". It needs no change. 3.94. Section 3(64) deﬁnes the expression "will". It needs no change. 3.95. Section 3(65) deﬁnes the expression "writing". It needs no change. Revised section 3(66) 3(66) "year" shall mean a year reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar. 3.96A. We have ﬁnished discussion of section 3 , which contains the principal deﬁnitions. _3A"' The section applies to the General Clauses Act, 1897 , and to Central Acts passed tliereaiter. Non-application We are recommending the insertion of certain new deﬁnitions.' Some of them may not be "f s"°t'°" 3"" appropriate for existing laws.' Hence, in respect of them, an exception is required to the general provision in section 3 . l*or that purpose, we recommend a new section as follows ;-- Section 3A (new) 3A. The deﬁnitions in section 3 of the following words and expressions, that is to say. (i) "daughter", do not apply to-- (a) this Act so far as it relates to the period before the day' of . . . . . . . .. or (b) to any Central Act or Regulation made before the. . . . . day5 of . . . . . . . . . . . . . ., 1974. 3.97. No changes are required in sections 4 and 4A. scction 4 and 4A. 3.98. A new section dealing with grammatical variations and cognate expressions is Section 4B_ proposed to be added. Grammatical Variations and exclusion 3.99. It will also be useful to provide that deﬁnitions are subject to a different intention 'ti, '::fril't';§:f"5 in the context. Such a provision will shorten the language of Central Acts. Hericeforth, it (New). will not be necessary to insert, in the deﬁnition clause in each Act, any words excluding a contrary intention in the context. The new section should be as follows: Section 4B (New) "4B. In every Central Act or Regulation, made on or after the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3, where a word is deﬁned. (a) the word shall have the meaning assigned by the otherwise requires ; (b) grammatical variations of that word and its cognate expressions shall have corres- ponding meanings, unless the context otherwise requires." deﬁnition, unless the context 1. Section 3(62A) is to be added. See para 3.91. supra. 2. See para 3.lA, supra. 3. Cf. discussion as to section 3(35) --"month", para 3 .63, supra. 4. Date of commencement of amended Act. , 5. Date of Commencement of amending Act to be entered. 6. Date of commencement of amending Act to be entered. Section 5- Commencement of Acts. Position in England. CHAPTER 4 COMMENCEMENT I ntroduclory. 4.1. Sections 5 to 13 of the Act c0r1tain~--as the heading above these sections shows----- general rules of construction, other than deﬁnitions. These sections fall under two broad groups. First, there are sections' dealing with the commencement and repeal of enactments. Secondly. there are sections" which provide for other general rules of construction. The ﬁrst group is the more important of the two, in point of quality, because it deals with the life of enactments. The second deals with certain matters of detail, such as, time, distance, rate of duty, gender and number, and the like. We shall first deal with the sections in the ﬁrst group, and then proceed to the second group. Certain new matters, not dealt with in the present Act, will then be dealt with.' In the present Chapter, we concentrate on the commencement of Acts, Regulations and Ordinances. Commencement 4.1A. Section 5(1) of the Act provides that where any Act of Parliament is not expressed to come into "operation" on a particular day, it shall come into operation on the day on which it receives the assent of the President. The section also deals with pre-Constitution Acts, but we are primarily concerned with Acts of Parliament. 4.2 In England, before 1793, by a legal ﬁction an Act of Parliament took eﬁect from the ﬁrst day of the session. But, in order to abolish a ﬁction "so ﬂatly absurd and unjust") the Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act, 1793 (c. 13), enacted that the Clerk of Parliament should endorse, on every Act, immediately after its title, the date of its passing and receiving the Royal assent. This endorsement is part of the Act, and is the date of its commencement, when on other time is provided.' Before the Act of 1793, the rule was this: When no date was ﬁxed, an Act came into force on the ﬁrst day of the session in which it was passed, and consequently, all Acts passed in the same session were considered to have received the royal assent on the same day. This was based upon a legal ﬁction, according to which .the whole of a session of Parliament was regarded as having been held on its ﬁrst day. This meant that if a statute passed on the last day of the session made a previously innocent act criminal or even capital, all persons who had been doing it during the session, while the act was still innocent, would be liable to suffer the punishment imposed.5 This rule was obviously inconvenient by reason of its retrospective operation, and was often found to work injustice; where two Acts passed in the same session were repugnant, it was, as Lord Tenterden pointed out." impossible to know which of the two ought to be held to repeal the other. This rule was abolished by the Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act, 1793, as already stated. In England, unless a contrary intention clearfy appears, the expression "the passing of this Act," in a statute, means the date of royal assent, and not the date ﬁxed by the Act at which all or certain parts of it are to come into operation.' . Sections 5 to 8 . . Sections 9 to 13 . . 1 Bl. Comm. 70 n. . Tomlinson v. Bullock, (1879) 4 Q.B.D. 230, 232 (Lush and Mellor JJ.). . See the case of Attorney General v. Panzer (1772) 6 Bro. P.C. 486. . R. v. Middlesex, (1831) 2 B&Ad. 818. 82]. 36 RR 758. _ . See Ex D. Rasbleigh, In re Dalzell, (1875) 2 Ch. D. 9, followed In R. v. Smith (1910) l K.B. l725. \X$U\->LaJI\)*-' 30 31 4.3. The Canadian Interpretation Act has a provision similar' to the English Act of 1973 quoted below? :--- "The Clerk of the Parliaments shall endorse on every Act, immediately after the title thereof, the day, month and year when the Act was assented to in Her Majesty's name; such endorsement shall be taken to be a part of the Act, and the date of such assent shall be the date of the commencement of the Act, if no other date of commencement is therein provided." 4.3.A. As already stated', the present rule in England concerning the commencement of statutes is, that in the absence of a specially appointed day, statutes commence their operation upon receipt of the Royal assent. Unless a new statute provides otherwise, the old law remains applicable to all events occurring before the commencement of the new statute. 4.3B. The Indian provision in section 4 follows the English law. But it should be pointed out that the date of assent is not the only alternative in regard to commencement of an Act. Sir Cocil Car5 has expressed the view that "in the rush of modern law--making, many laws tumble out of the oven half--baked ;"---not only in the sense that the country may not be ready for them, but also in the sense that admimstrative preparations and the making of delegated legislation may be necessary to bring statute into force. It may be noted that such special cases are dealt with by postponing the commencement of the Act to a date to be ﬁxed later. As already stated, there are several alternatives as to commencement. (a) In the first place, a specific future or past date may be mentioned in the Act itself as the date on which the Act shall come into force or shall be deemed to have come into force. In the former case (future date), the Act is prospective in its operation; in the latter case (past date), it is retrospective in its operation. Thus, the recent Code of Criminal Procedure " received the assent of the President on the 25th January, 1974, but section 1(3) of the Act speciﬁcally lays down that it shall come into force on the 1st day of April, 1974. (b) In the second place, no speciﬁc date may be mentioned in the Act, the date may be left to the Central Government to be appointed' by notiﬁcation in the Oﬂicial Gazette. This device has been called by Sir Cocil T. Carrl as the "appointed day" clause device. This device is resorted to when postponement of the commencement of an Act is necessitated by reason of appointments to be made under the Act, or rules to be framed thereunder and other preliminary arrangements to be carried out for the proper and effective functioning of the Act, or by reason of any change being made by the Act in status or rights the effect of which it is desirable to delay, or by reason of new conditions being imposed on a section of the public which makes it desirable, that they should have time to adjust themselves to the new law. In this connection, Sir Cocil Carr remarks" "When Parliament makes big constitutional or administrative changes. it is convenient to take time over the various stages rather than to bring them into force immediately on the passing of the Act or upon any hard and fast date. Such a device is particularly useful and appropriate to the introduction of---- (a) constitutional changes, for example, those made by the Acts which respectively created the Dominion of Canada in 1867, the Commonwealth of Australia in 1900 the Union of South Africa in 1909 and those made by the Government of India Act 1919 and the Government of Ireland Act of 1920; and . Para 4.2, .SupI'u. . Section 5(1), Canadian Interpretation Act. . See also para 4.15, infra. . Para 4.? .m/mi Carr, Concerning Lnglish Administrative Lav (1941). pages 42, 43. . The Code of Criminal Procedure . I974 (2 of 1974). . Carr, Delegated Legislation. . Carr, Delegated Legislation. ooxioxf/-4:-mm...' Provision in Canada. Present rules in England. Several alternatives as to com me ncement. Provision in State General Clauses Acts. Practice in Rome and France. English theory. Question whether date of publication should be substituted---- considered. Change in sec- tion 5(1) not recommended as to date of com- mencement. 32 (b) administrative changes, such as, those occasioned in England by the local Govern- ment Acts of 1888 and 1894, the Education Acts of 1902, 1903 and 1918, the Patents and Designs Act of 1919, the establishment of a Public "Trustee (see 6 Ed. VII, Ch. 55) or the inter~departmental transfer of powers under the 1919 Acts which created the Ministry of Health, the Scottish Board of Health and the Ministry of Transport ." (c) Then, in the third place, the "appointed day" device can be quite frequently ela- borated by providing that different days may be appointed (a) for diﬁerent purposes and for different provisions of the Act, or (b) for different areas, or (c) for different persons or classes of persons. For example, part of the Government of India Act, 1919 came into force on January 1st, 1920; other parts came into force on successive dates during April, July and December of that year, while the remainder was ﬁnally brought into force by the beginning of 1921, on one date for Madras and the Central Provinces, on another date for Bihar and Orissa, on a third date for Bombay and the rest of India. Provision for a similar gradual enforcement of the Government of India Act, 1935 was made in that Act.' In this fashion, in the majority of the post--indepcndence Central Acts, the "appointed day" device has been adopted. A mere look at the Statute Book will show this. 4.4. We may note that some of the State General Clauses Acts provide that an Act shall come into force on the day on which the assent of the Governor thereto is published in the Official Gazette. 4.5. In ancient Rome, a Senalus Ccmsullum had no force till deposited in the Temple of Saturn." 4.6. In France, the President of the Republic promulgates laws, within the fortnight following their ﬁnal adoption, and transmission to the Government." The act of promulgation is deﬁnitely part of the legislative process. A statute is made known to the public by publication in the "Bulletin Des Lois" or "Journal Official". The Code Napoleon,' declared that laws were binding from the moment their promulgation could be known, and laid down various dates when promulgation was to be deemed to have taken place. 4.7. The English theory, however, is different. "Every man in England". says Blackstone, "is, in judgment of law, party to the making of an Act of Parliament, being present there at by his representatives." 4.8. Keeping in mind the position as discussed above, we have examined the question whether the provisions" in section 5(1) should be modiﬁed so as to provide that Central Acts shall come into force on the date of publication7 in the Official Gazette. In fact, that was the provision proposed in the draft Report which had been circulated for comments by the previous Commission. 4.9. Having regard to various important considerations. and after careful examination of all aspects of the matter, we have come to the conclusion that the present position as laid down in section 5(1) should not be disturbed. In fact, because of the present practice, no hardship is caused. There is no statutory obligation to publish Central Acts in the Official Gazette, except that gazette copies of Acts are prima facie evidence of the correctness of the texts thereof." But. in practice. Central Acts are always published in the Oflicial Gazette without . Section 320. Government of India, Act . 1935. . Levy 394, Sec. Suet Aug. 94. . Article 10 , French Constitution, 1958. Article 1 , Code Napoleon. Bl. Comm. (F) 183. . Para 4. 1A. .\u/mi. . cf. Para 4.4, Supra . Sections 31 and 84 of the Indian l'.-'\'idenee Act, 187. 3o\lO\'.)I-.l§(,.;|\)._. 33 delay, and generally on the same day on which the assent of the President to these Acts is received. Publication in the gazette is the most autlicntic form of publication. As Macaulay,' the first Law Member to the Government of lndia. observed in one of his Minutes-- "And what does promulgation mean '3 It means, if I understand its sense, the publication of a law in an authentic form. The publication of a law in the gazette will henceforth be a publication in an authentic form and will therefore he a promulga- tion." 4.10. This ﬁnishes the point of substance concerning section 5(1) . Certain verbal changes are, however, needed in section 5(1) . For [he words "come into opt-ration", the words "come into force" should be used, in conformity with the phrascology generally adopted in Central Acts?' 4.11. Sometimes," a distinction is sought to be made hctwecn "coming into force" and "coining into effect", but such a distinction is not usually observed in practice. As to the expression "at once" which is occasionally used in commencement clauses (in State Laws}, the under--mcntioned case may be seen.' 4.12. To make section 5(1) cornprch-ensi\.-C in relation to the date of commencement of Regulations and Ordinances, we recommend the insertion of a subsection to the effect that (i) Ordinances shall come into force on their promulgation; and (ii) Regulations shall come into force on their making. 4.12A. We now come to section 5(3) which deals with the time of coinmenccrnent. This sub--section has a history. It had been held in England" that an Act which comes into operation on a given day becomes law as soon as the day commences, and every event which occurred [during the day would he an event which took place after the passing of the .-"-'«.ct. If the Act received the Royal assent on the 10th August, the passing of the Act would. in contemplation of law, take place imincdiatcly on the beginning of the day. That is what the court held, and. to emphasise the point, it stated that the Act commenced as soon as the clock had struck twelve on the night of the 9th August." Titir. later proposition was adopted in England in the Interpretation Act, and is to he found in section 5(3) of our Act. In a Madras easel, the question to he considered was whether an arrest made at 4.30 or 5' AM. in the morning of the 23rd January, 1947 in' pursuance of Madras Ordinance 1 of 1947, was legal, and it was held that although the Ordinance was published in the Oﬂicial Gazette late in the day on the 23rd January, it must be deemed to have had effect from mid- nign; of the night between 22nd and 23rd January. This, in substance. is an explanation of section 5(3) . 4.1213. In one of the comments received on the draft Report circulated by the previous Commission, a p '.;at has been made" that the clause as to the time of commencement of an Act may oﬁend article 20H} of the Constittition. so far as penal .'--'tct~; are concerned. The . lVlacaL1]a_'r. Minute No. 5 ofthc 14-th .lu:~.::_ 1335. . Also see sections 6(a) , I2, 22, 24. General Clauses Act . . See Adarslr Bhnndar v. Sales Tax Oﬁiccr, A.l.R. 195'.-' .-'tIJ_ 415, 483, para G2, second sub-paragraph. . In re Veerab.'rta'!rz.r_}'_1'a, A.1.R. 1950 Mad. 243, 246. . Tomilson v. Bullock. (l 8l'3) 4 QB. 2330, 231. . Tomflsaav. Bullock, t_l3l'S}4 Q.B. 230. 233. . Clrenclz.-'ah V. Cnmrm'.rrr'nner o_fl"ni'i:_-e, ALE. I948 Mad. 258. . Commend of Shri FLL. Narasimltarn, as Chief' Justice of the Orissa High Court. m--amu.n.nmm...- Verbal changes in section 5- words "come into operation" to be modiﬁed. "coming into force", "coming into eilect" and "at once". Regulations and t')rclinani.:es---- Cornrncnccrnent of. SecLion-5f3)- time-of commen- cement. Section 5 and time of commen- cement--arti-cle 20(1) considered Time of com- mencement of provisions of an Act. Printed date of assent Presump- tion. Provision as to commencement of Ordinances and Regulations. Mandatory pro- vision to print date of assent not suggested. Recornmendation regs. section 5 . 34 point made is as follows: Suppose an act which is otherwise lawful is made an offence by a particular statute of the legislature, and that statute comes. into force say, at 10 A.M. Under the clause, it is deemed to have come into force from the midnight of the previous day. Suppose the act, which has now become an offence, was committed at, say, 6 AM. on that day. 'Then, by virtue of the proposed clause, that act will become an offence, though article 20(1) of the Constitution prohibits retrospective penal legislation. This is the point made in the comment. It is emphasised that in article 20(1) , the words used are "at the time of the commission of the Act," and not "at the date of the commission". The suggestion is that in the proposed clause, it may he made clear that it does not apply to statutes or statutory provisions relating to the creation of offences for the ﬁrst crime. 4.12BB. We have considered the suggestion carefully. While we appreciate that article 20(1) of the Constitution has to be borne in mind, we do not think that it is necessatjr, for that reason, to e.rc!na'e. from the proposed clause, statutory provisions creating an oﬂence for the first time. The clause has the advantage of laying down a general rule as to the time of commencement, and it would be a convenient rule. in so far as a particular statute creates an offence, it will be read as subject to article 20(1) of the Constitution. The contitutional provision is paramount to the statutory provision in section 5(1) . An express exception is not required. From the point of view of drafting, a speciﬁc exception will make the provision very cumbersome. 4.12C. Some difficulty may arise where an Act is to have extra-territorial application, in a place where the standard time is diﬁerent from the time of the country where the Act is passed. The crucial test is the date prevailing in such place} Such extraordinary and rare situations also need not come in the way of the proposed provision as to the time of commence- II1€I'llC. 4.13. So much as regards the time of commencement of an Act. We are of the view that the time of commencement of a provision of an Act should also be deﬁned. Such a provision will be useful for cases where the different provisions of an Act come into force on diﬁetent dates? We are recommending an amendment of section 5 accordingly. 4.14. A presumption as to the printed date of assent {in respectyof Acts) would also be useful. 4.1441. A provision as to the commencement of Ordinances and Regulations is also proposed, as it would be useful. 4.15. A further provision requiring the Government to print the date of assent to each Act was suggested during our discussion. We are, however. of the view that such a provision may not be appropriate in the General Clauses Act . Provisions on the subject contained in the Canadian Act, section 5(1) , and the Australian Act, section 6 , were considered by us. The English statute of 1793, and its history" were also borne in mind. We, however, feel that the suggested provision may create complications, and are not inclined to recommend its insertion. 416. In the result, we recommend that section 5 should be amended to carry out the points discussed above.' The revised section should be as follows. ]_ Rt-._v.-. v. Lfgﬂn, (1957) All. ER. 688 (Court Martial Appeal Court). 2_ Cy', para. 4.36 .m,ru'rr. 3. Para 4.2, srrpm. AL Para 4 . 4 to 4. I5, .\'rr,rJrr1'. 35 Re1--'i5€d secrion 5 ' "5. (1) Where any Ceiltral Act is not expressed to come into _force on :1 particular daj-,'_. géggiﬂgfhm then it shall come into force-- enactmmm (1') in the case of a Ce:-iirm' .-4vL.'i made before the commencement of the Constitu- tion, on the day on which it receives the assent of the Gm-'ernor--Genera1; and (ii) in the c'a.s'e of an Aer of P(.'r'iicm'I€r1f, on the day on which it receives the assent of the President. (2) Where am Ordinance promuigaied or Regulation made by the President on or after the ...................... ..day of ............. ,2 is not expressed to come into .' force an a pariiciriar day, then it shall come into force on the day on which the Ordinance is promulgated or fire Regzriarian is made, as the case may be. ' (3) Unless the contrary intention is expressed, every Central Act, Ordinance, or Regula- - tion or provision thereof shall be construed as coming into force immediately on expiration of the day preceding the beginning of the day on which it comes into force. (4) The date appearing on the Copy of :2 Central Act printed by or under the authority of the Central Government immediately after its title shaii be evidence that such. date is the date on which the Governor-Generaf or the President, as the case may he, gave his assent." . 1. The revised sub-section (1) wii[ apply to existing Acts also. ' 2. Date of ::Jim1en-ccmznt of amendment Act to be entered. 15 M of Law;"."-1----6 Introduction. Section-SA (rte w') Marginal notes. Qualiﬁed view. Opposite view. CHAPTER 5 PART OF STATUTES Marginal notes 5.1. The Act does not contain any detailed provisions relating to the use in interpretation of marginal notes, headings, punctuation and the like. In view of the obscurity of the position as regards some of these matters, We propose to devote this chapter to a consideration of the question whether speciﬁc provisions on the subject are needed. 5.2. From time to time, controversies arise as to how far a marginal note (or side note] can be used in interpreting a section. In 1904, Lord Me Naghten, sitting in the Judicial Committee hearing an appeal from India, stated,' "It is well-settled that the marginal notes cannot be referred to for the purpose of construing the Act." He regarded the contrary opinion as "having originated in mistake." Nevertheless, the contrary opinion seems to have persisted amongst lavvvers, and resort is often sought to be made to the side note in construing the section. From time to time, legal journals in India and elsewhere have also discussed this question.' 5.3. There exists also a qualiﬁed view, namely. that where the text of the statute is, in any respect, ambiguous, help can be sought from the marginal note. According to this view, while marginal notes could not be used for interpreting or curtailing the provisions of a section where its meaning is plain, those notes could be used to clear an arnbiguit',3 or to furnish some clue as to the meaning and purpose of the section.' 5.4. For example, in a Gujarat Case," it was stated that the marginal note to a section supported the construction placed by the court. The court observed. "No doubt, the marginal note cannot be referred to for the purpose of construing a section, but it certainly furnishes some clue as to the meaning and purpose of the rection. The marginal note to section 39 clearly indicates that the object and purpose of the section is to effect termination of dispropor- tionately excessive voting right in existing companies. There are no words in the marginal note limiting the object anti purpose of the section to termination oi' disproportionately excessive voting rights only in respect of preference shares. The marginal note also thus indicates that section 89(1) applies to all existing shares whether they be preference shares or equity shares." 5.5. As against this, there are cases holding that it marginal note cannot be referred to co-nstruing a statute," or that they cannot control the meaning of a section? for the purpose of Kiifiwtir v. Ron Jagar Pa! Sfngh. (1904) "-1 IA. 132. 141 lP.C'-'J. 2. See for example, comments as to marginal notes in (:1) (1934) 1-19 I.C.62 Lb) (1934) Born. LR. 100. (c)(l934)6T srad.t.J.35 (dj (I934) 4 Ali. W'.R. 25. _ _Mm:te1Eiecrric 0:'! Mill V. Corporation of Calcutta, A.I.R. 1960 Cal. 333, 339. _ Sa.I*<.7fSI1r2h '-'. State QfA.|1£lll'lFtI Pradesh, A.I.R. 1953 AP. 3-14. _ Juror: Sirlgh V. Balbhadra Smgh, A.l.R. 1963 Guj. 209, 219 (EN. Bhagwati .l.]. Cor~imissioner offneome-tax v. Aﬁmedbhai Umarirfiai 8:. Co., (1950) S.C.R. 33-5, 353; A.l.R. 1950 SC. 134, H-1. _ Naijmjchva B}-rack v. Shyamsunder Holder, (1953) S.C.R. 533, S38; A.I.R. 1953 S.C. 143, I50. 9V.JI.|'.L.Lm) 36 37 56- In general, courts in England and Austrialia held that the marginal notes cannot be used as a means of ﬁnding the true meaning of a section when the meaning of that section is in doubt.' Indeed, in some cases, Parliamer-,ts have passed Acts which seem designed to make sure that the marginal notes will not be used to find the meaning of the section. For example, the Victorian Parliament has passed an Act," stating that : "Neither the marginal notes nor the foot--notes to any such Act other than any annual appropriation .-"+.=;.'t Shall he a part thereof." In India, the Speal.-te;' oi" ihc Lo}: Sabha has also ruled' that marginal notes do not form part of the Act. 5.653. In an earlier English case,5 Phillimore, L. I. had observed, "I am aware of the general rule of law as to marginal notes, at any rate in public general Acts of Parliament, but that rule is founded, as well be seen on reference to the cases, upon the principle that these notes are inserted not by Parliament not under the authority of Parliament but by irresponsible persons. Where, however . . . . . . . ..tl1e marginal notes are mentioned as already existing and established, it may well be that they form part of an Act of Parliament." 5.7. But, in a fairly recent English case," Harman L. J. said, "I have always been brought up to believe that to interpret an Act of Parliament by the side notes to the sections is quite inadmissible, although there are judicial pronouncements seeming to show that judges have not always refrained, as in my judgment they should, from giving some weight to them." In a latter case,' it was held that the marginal note is not to be regarded as a legitimate aid to construction. Contrary decision} therefore, appear to be out of tune with well--settler.i principle. 5.8. In fact, in a judgment of the House of Lords," admissibility of side notes as an aid to construction. Lord Reid speciﬁcally rejected the 5.9. 011 principle, the rule that a marginal note is not relevant for the interpretation of a legal provision applies as much to the constitution as to an ordinary law. 5.9. But, so far as ordinary Acts of Parliament are concerned, it is desirable to settle the law--or, if one prefers that expression--to re--settle the law," The reason given usually for not treating marginal notes as part of the Act and as not admissible in interpretation is that the Legislature does not discuss them when discussing the Bill, and that they are never put to vote and can be amended under the authority of Government without reference to Parliament. 1. See, for example, .-'v'i'.t-on v. A!£:'JJ'f1P_}'-Gﬂllffal, (1930) 1 Ch. 566. 593-, (per Lard Hanworth M.R.); {.S'urIdersan v. Forheringham, (1335) ll V.L.R. 190; Darke v. Thornton, (1883) 1 Q.L.R. 159. 2. Arts Interpretation Act, 1958, section 11(2) , (Victoria). 3. See also section 13(3) of the Austrian Act. 4. See the rulings given by the Speaker on the 7th February 1950 and 10th February 1960 {Lok Sabha Dehates--Part 11, dated 7th February I950, pages 409-419] (during discussion on the Delhi Road Transport Authority Bill and the Undssirable Immigrants (Expulsion from Assarn}BiI[re5pcctively. . Re. Working Urban C0tmcE!Acr, (1914) I Ch. 300, 322. . Parson: v. Laboratories (B.H.N.) L-td., {l9IS3) 2 All ER. 658, GT4. . Uddin v. A5-metered Portland Cement, U965} 1 Al]. ER. 347, 349. _ Stephens v. Cuekﬁeld Rural Disrrir-r Comte.-'l (1960) 2 Q.]3. 373, . Chandler v. Dr'rec!or of Pt¢bl'it' Prorerm'.-'um.'. (1962; 3 W.i_.R. 694, 7U5[ I'LL.) See also para 5.10, infra. . Para 5 .2, supra. 'D"°O¢-qa\Ln Position in Eng- land and in Aus- tralia. Recent English C3388. Need to reeettle the law. , ,n;,_n_ai Recommendation as-to-marginal notes. Marginal note not part of enact- ments. Section 5B(new) Headings. 38 We would, however, like to point out that apart from this. there is a more substantial reason. The reason is that tl1e marginal note is intended merely to give a brief indication of the matters dealt with in the provision against which it appears, and is not intended to give an exhaustive picture of the section. In fact, logically, it is difficult to see how a marginal not (even if it purports to give a complete picture of the section) can be taken into account in construing the section, because, then we would have not one but two parallel provisions on the same subject at the same place. However careful the draftsman may be in framing the marginal note, it is impossible for him to put everthing in it. By its very nature, it is a compressed gist of the section. It is not intended to have a legal effect. It is an extra-legal aid inserted for convenience. 5.10. Judicial evolution has itself failed to yield any reasonably certain test. In addition to the cases already cited} we may refer to a fairly recent decision of the House of Lords? where Lord Reid and Lord Upjohn have, as to the proper use of marginal notes, expressed views which, to some extent, run on divergent lines. It may incidentally be noted that in India, Central Act 1 of 1854 was the first Acta introduced and passed in Council which contained marginal notes. 5.11. We are, therefore, of the opinion that a speciﬁc and categorical provision to the eﬁect that marginal notes do not form part of the Act is required, for the reasons stated above. We recommend accordingly. We also recommend a provision to the eﬁect that marginal notes may be corrected or amended under the authority of Governrnent. The new section to be inserted will be as follows : Section 5- -A (New) 5-3.. The marginal note appended to any provi$ir)n of on): Central Act or Regulation, and the reference to the number and year of on): former law in the margin against any such provision,- (a) shall form no part of the said Central Act or Regulation, as the case may be; (b) shall be deemed to have been inserted for the sake of convenience only; and (-3) may be corrected or amended wider the authority of Government. Headings 5.11A. We think that opportunity should also be taken of making it clear that the headings of the Parts or Chapters into which any Central Act or Regulation is divided shall be deemed to be part of the Act or Regulation. Since' a controversy has arisen in England on the point, this clarification is desirable. Lord Reid said," in the House of Lords : "A cr0ss--heading out to indicate the scope of the sections which follow it, but there is always a possibility that the scope of one of these sections may have been widened by amend- ment. - But a side-note is a poor guide to the scope of sections, for it can do no more than indicate the main subject with which the section deals." 1. See para 5.2, supra. 2. D.P.P. v. Schnieder, (1969) 3 All Eng. Report 1649, 1651, 1657. ' 3. Central Act 1 of 1854 related to acquisition of land. 4. Sec. D_.P.P. v. Schnieder, (1969) 3 All E.R. 1640, 1641. 165'? (H.L.}. 5. D.P.P. v. .S'ehm'ea'er, (1969) 3 mi ER. 1640, I647. 1643. 1644. 1650 {House of Lords)- 39 Lord Hodson said, "...although there are no cross--headings in the Act of 1928 whereas' the corresponding section of the Act of 1948, section 322, appears under the cross--hea_ding "offences antecedent to or in the course of winding up" the construction of the relevant section ought not to be governed ultimately by a consideration of cross-headings even though some attention may be paid to them. Viscount Dilhorne said : "I do not consider that it is proper to infer from the title to a part of the Act and from this cross-heading that the scope of the subject is limited as the respondent contends . . . . .. while I would not suggest that, when one is considering an Act of Parliament, one is not entitled to look at the title given to a part of the Act. and to cross-headings, the weight to be attached to them is, in my opinion, every slight and less than that which should be given to a preamble. In Chandler v. Director of Public Pro.secutimt,'-' Lord Reid said that side note to a section cannot be used as an aid to construction. I agree. A marginal or side--note is inserted by the draftsman as an indication, but not as a deﬁnition, of the contants of the section. "Similarly, in my view, the title given to a part of an Act and the cross--heading to a modern Act, which are inserted by the draitsinaii and not subject to amendment by the members of either House, are no more than guides to the contents of the part or of the sections which follow. They are not meant to control the operation of the enacting words and it would be wrong to permit them to do so." Lord Upjohn said : "It must always be remembered that cross-headings, punctuations and marginal notes are not part of the Bill passing through Parliament in this sense that they cannot be debated and amended -as the Bill passes its various stages, in marked contract to the preamble and the long title. These cross--headings and marginal notes are put there in the lirst place by the Parliamentary draftsman, but as the Bill proceeds may be altered (probably in consultation with the draftsman) by the oﬁicials o-f Parliament to accord with amendments made to the body of the Bill as it progresses. " ................ ..what role do cross--headings play in the construction of the Act ? In my opinion, it is wrong to conﬁne their role to the resolution of ambiguities in the body of the Act when the Court construing the Act is reading it, though to understand it, it must read the cross-headings as well as the body of the Act and that will always be a useful pointer as to the intention of Parliament in enacting the immediately following sections. Whether the cross- heading is no more than a pointer or label or is helpful in assisting to construe or even in some cases to control the meaning or ambit of these sections must necessarily depend on the circumstances of each case, and I do not think it is possible to lay down any rules." 5.12. Similar controversy is likely to arise, in our courts and a speciﬁc provision is desirable. We, tlierefore, recommend insertion of the following new section :-- Secfiorz SB (New) Recommendation as to headings. The headings of the Parts or Chapters into whfcfz any Central Act or Regulation is divided Hwdiuss 13311 shall be deemed to he pan' of the Act or Regulation, as the case may be. 5.13. Another allied question is regarding punctuation. View is that in modern times, punctuation forms part of an enactment and regard should accordingly be had to it in construing the enactment. It is not however' possible to be very 5 7 l. The Coliipaiiitts Act, N H I I 7 mm W H W,' """" "' 2. Clirtitdfcr V. D. P. F. (I962) 3 All E.l{. 140. of enactrnents. Broadly speaking, the accepted Punctuation. 40 precise or dogmatic in this regard. The fact that punctuation has, for some time past, been .a part of the statute as enacted by the Legislature, is important as indicative of the value of punctuation marks as an aid in construction. Its use, however, seems to be limited to an obscure or doubtful provision of law, and, of course, the assistance to be derived from punctua- tion marks in interpretation will depend much on the accuracy and correctness with which they have been used. Until 1849, in England, sta1ntes,--i.e., the Bills engrossed on parchment, were not punctuated} but the position is different now. 5.14. It is often stated that good drafting should eliminate the need for punctuation. But perfect draftsinanship is an ideal which is rarely realised. Though not often used, punctuation is a guide in interpretation, but has to be resorted to cautiously. It is a minor element in the construction of a statute? Karl N. Lewellyn-3 has given illustrations with regard to canons of construction. One 0! them is--p-unctuation marks will not control the plain and evident meaning of language.-4 This is all that can he said on the subject with confidence. 5.15. In one of the con1ments5 on the draft Report which was circulated by the previous Commission, it was stated that it is desirable to insert a separate provision dealing with the principles of construction of punctuation in statutes. The old rule that punctuations are made by the printer and should not be taken notice of during construction," {it was stated) seems no longer in force. Since punctuations in the statutes are put by the draftsrnen, and are passed by the legislatures and in some recent decisions, the Supreme Court also has taken note of punctuations while construing the statutory provisions, the suggestion is that "it is better to clarify the law on the subject." We have already stated the position ahovel and we do not think that any speciﬁc provision in this regard would be appropriate. 1. (a) .Bt..N'0w v. Wadkr'rr(1858} 116 R.R- 1- (l)) R. V. Olehem (I352) 21 L.7.lVl,C_ I34. '2, (a) .--is.fzwi'.rzi Karim: v_ Ambindo Bose, (1953) S.C.R. 1, 41, AIR. I952 S.C. 369. 353- fb) Shambhu Raddy V. Chzilurrmia, A.I.R.. 1966, Mys. 311. 3. Lewellyn, 'Remarks on the theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules or canons about how statutes are [0 be construed" (1950) 3 Vanderbilt Law Rev, 395. 4_ Comment of Shri R.L. Narasinihan, as Chict'Justiee of the Orissa High Court. 5. Inland Revenue Commxkmiom-r v. Hlnchy, (I960) A.C. 748, 3'65. 6. Note in (1959) L.Q.R. referred to. '_J'. Para 5.14, supra. l: r. CHAPTER 6 REPEAL AND AMENDMENT Repeal 6.1. In the last chapter we have dealt with rules relating to certain parts of statutes. We now come to more important questions concerning repeal and amendment. 6.2. Section 6 of the Act deals with repeal. Its main object is to reverse the common law rule that a repeal obliterates the statute for all purposes for the future. Though this section is one of the most important sections in the code. and contains a provision of frequent application a study of the decided cases up--to--date shows that the problems that have arisen as to repeal are (i) either outside the section} or (ii? cc-rcern the application of the provisions of the sec- tion, 01' (iii) concern the effect of a S€[J€l!2i.i2 repeal clause in a parrticular Central Act. These problems cannot be :1veided or minimised by an amendment of section 6 , because their solu- tion does not lie in any general rule. 6.3. The question that arise (in relation to repeal) outside section 6 relate usually to the eﬂect of a particular enactment as attracting the provisions of section 6 . 6.4. The entire problem of determining the extent to which existing legistlation is repealed by subsequent statutes ultimately resolves itself into one of legislative intent." As Mr. Justice Story said,3 it is not snilicient "to establish that subsequent laws cover some or even all of the case provided for (by the prior Act}, for, they may be merely aﬁirmative, or cumulative or auxiliary." The intention of the legislature to repeal "must be clear and mani- fest". Questions concerning this legislative intent to repeal and the extent of the repeal are obviously incapable of being solved by a general rule. ' ' 6.5. It may be noted that section 6 would apply to a case of repeal even if there is a simul- taneous new enactment, unless a contrary intention appears from the new enactment.' The consequences laid down in section 6 of the General Clauses Act will follow, unless as the sec- tion itelf says--a dillerent intention appears. ln the case of a simple repeal, there is scarcely any room for the expression of a contrary intention. Of course. when repeal is followed by fresh legislation on the same subiect, one would undoubtedly have to look to the provisions of the new Act-abut only for the purpose of determining whether they indicate a different intention. lt cannot, therefore, be said, as a broad proposition, that section 6 of the General Clauses Act is ruled out whenever there is a repeal of an enactment followed by a fresh legislation. Section 6 would be applicable in such cases also, unless the new legislation manifests an intention incompatible with or contrary to the section. Such in-- compatibility would have to be ascertained from a consideration of all the relevant provisions of the new law, and the mere absence of a saving clause is, by itself, not material. 6.6- There is one important matter concerning implied repeals, which needs to be mentioned. By its terms. section 6 does not state that it applies also to implied repeals, and, for some time, the Supreme Court also kept the question open." In 1964, the question came I. Para 6.3. infra. 2. Wood v. U.S. , if) L. ed, 987, 253. 3 Red Rock v. Henary, 27 L. ed. 25]', 253. 4. Ma': Munshiia! Bemram V. .S'.P. Jain (1971) 2 S.C.J. 307. 5. Trusr Mm" Lnritiami Stalker Brrrrlri v. Amrirsar Improvement Trust, A.I.R. 1963 SC. 976. 41 Repeal Section 6-effect of repeal. Problems ari- sing in relation to repeal, out- side seetion 6. I_egislative-inte- nt. An-plicability of section 6 in ca- se of re-enact- rneut. Section 6 and implied 1-epeals. Section EA. 42 up before the Supreme Court in these circumstances} The Orissa Mining Areas Development Fund Act, 1952 (an Act of the Orissa State Legislature] was. by reason of the passing of the (Central) Mines & Minerals [Regulation and Development) Act, 1957, superseded. The latter Act had no express repeal clause, but since the regulation of mines and the development of the minerals to the extent provided in the Act wastaken under its control by the Union by a declaration in 3 section 2 thereof, this consequence necessarily followed. 6.7. Posing the question whether the expression "repeal" in section 6 was of sufficient amplitude to cover implied repeal. and noting the absence o[ direct authority on the point in England or in the United States, the Supreme Court took the view that the principle underlying section 6 was that every latter enactment which supersedes an earlier one or puts an end to the earlier state of the law, is presumed to intend the continuance of rights accrued and liabilities incurred under the superseded enactment, unless there are suﬂicient indications express or implied in the later enactment, designed to completely obliterate the earlier state of the law. 6.8. The Court then examined the question whether this principle could or ought to be limited to cases where a particular form of words is used to indicate that the earlierplaw has been repealed, and made the following pertinent observations :- "The entire theory underlying implied repeals is that there is no need for the later enactment to state in express terms that an earlier enactment has been repealed by using any particular set of words or form of drafting, but that if the legislative intent to supersede the earlier law is manifested by the enactment of provisions as to effect such supersession, then there is in law a repeal notwithstanding the absence of the word 'repeal' in the later statute. Now, if the legislative intent to supersede the earlier law is the basis upon which the doctrine of implied repeal is founded, could there be any incongruity in attributing to the later legislation the same intent which section 6 presumes where the word 'repeal' is expressly used ? So far as statutory construction is concerned. it is one of the cardinal principles of the law that there is no distinction or difference between an express provision and a provi- sion which is neccssarily implied, for it is only the form that differs in the two cases and there is no dillerence in intention or in substance. A repeal may -be brought about by repugnant legislation, without even by reference to the Act intended to be repealed, for once legislative competence to effect a repeal is posited it matters little whether this is done expressly or inferentially or by the enactment of repugnant legislation." 6.8. Before we conclude our discussion of this section, we may point out that the concluding words of this section "as if the repealing Act or Regulation had not been passed" are its key words. As the Supreme Court observed} "The last nine words. ....are the key words, and mean that in respect of rights, obligations and liabilities acquired, accrued or incurred under the earlier Act, the repealing Act need not be read and legal proceedings and remedies are to continue under the repealed Act according to its tenor." As the section is quite comprehensive in its scope and content, we do not think that any change is called for in it. A mendmenr 6.9. We now come to amendment of Acts. Section 6A is as follows :-- i"6A. Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act repeals any enactment by which the textof any Central Act or Regulation was ,__ 1 Sm" 0}, am!" '._ M_,4_ Taalach :5': Co., A.I.R. 1964 SC. 1284, I294, paragraph 2|. 2- The declaration was with reference to the Constitution, Union List, entry 54. 3. .4.~. Channiah v. ,4. Barchachanian Sahib (decided in January 1963). ._ _ .-.4.-.a..___'_____'_ J' _h*_____.. 'r--=-;-* _ 'p-up-~._.. 4-._...___ .....w.'..-........ .- 43 zlmendedby the express omission, insertion or substitution of any matter, then. un- less a different intention appears. the repeal shall not aﬁect the continuance of any such amendment made by the enactment so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal." 6.10. Slight verbal changes in this section ( section 6A) are proposed, in order to describe VL.r1,a]_Change5_ more Precisely the enactment to what the section applies. 6.11. (a) We also recommend an exception regarding temporary Acts. A temporary Exceptign. amending Act, which amends a permanent Act. should die on its repeal: that is to -sav. the "'*°°'"m°"d¢d -' for temporary amendment should come to an end with the repeal of the amending Act. Acts (in sec. tion 6A) (b) Wliere a temporary Act amends a temporary Act, and the amending Act. is repealed, the principle of section 6A may apply. But it is unnecessary to encumber the section with any elaborate Provision on that point. 6.12. While on the subject of temporary amending laws, we may refer to the situation of 0r_dinanoe-ame- an Ordinance amending a temporary Act, which arose in a Supreme Court case.' In that case, "dmg Am' the enactments involved were.- (i) the Defence of India Act, 1939 (a temporary Act), {ii} the amendments thereto by Ordinance No. 12 of 1946, and (iii) the Repealing and Amending Act No. 2 of 1948 (which repealed the Ordinance and repealed the Defence of India Act also). On the repeal of the amending Ordinance, the amendments made thereby (in the nature of savings for rights, liabilities etc.) were held to -have died. The non--applicability or otherwise pf section 6A was not consi- dered,' perhaps because the section does not ﬁnd a mention in section 30 dealing with Ordi- nances . We have considered the question whether it is necessary to make a provision on the subject. If the effect of the formal repeal of a law amending a temporary law is to destroy the amend- ments made by the amending law, some practical ditﬁculties could arise, and one way to solve them would be to provide If in the clause under discussion) that it applies also to an Ordinance amending a temporary Act, when the Ordinance is repealed. We have, however, after careful consideration, decided not to encumber the section with such complications. 6.13. Aniendntents made by Ordinance would not, therefore, fall within the purview of this clause. 6.14. The topic of temporary amending Acts, in relation to their r.°xpt'r_t: (as distinguished Tempgmry am: mg from their repeal], is one which will be referred to later? Afcts_Expin, 0 . 6.15. The word "text" in section (SA has been construed by the Supreme Court in Iethnnand's Meaning of case-'1 as meaning "subject or theme". The argument there advanced was that this word related ,E{':xt'3:'¢*i:1d to the phrascology and the terminology used In the Act , but not to the content of that Act. This section 5A_ argument was negativcd. (The case related to the amendment made in the Wireless Telegraph Act, 1933 , by the amending Act of 1949. which was repealed in 1952}. 5,153" In amther supreme Court case, Om Prakarh v. State of U.P. ,"1 relating to the Ex _ E _ . . , . . pin.' 4:: Prevention of Corruption Act , it was held that ,sect.ton 4-09 of the [ndtan Penal Code was not tempopuy repealed by section 5 of the Prevention etc. Act, even irnpliedly. The question was, thus, one amendlns of repeal. But the following observations made by the Court are of interest with reference to ' temporary amending Acts: ]_ 'rare aj' U.f--'.-I-Viyifngaritartdar 1-954 3-C 533. 5357: Vl:3-l"='-- H 2. Para 6.15.25; t'rt,I'rzt. 3. Jethrtttrtrid v. State of Delhi, A.I.R. 1960 39. 92: 1 S-C-R. 755. 761. 4. Om Pmkarlt v. sum.» of {,-'.P., A.l.R. 195.? so 453. 463. (1957) s.c.a. 423, 424 {Govinda Merton 1.). 15 M of l_aw.l'?-4-7 Recommen- rlauon. Repeal of law making textual amendments in other laws. Section 613 (new)-- Reference to Acts etc. with title amended. Reference to Act etc. with short title amended. Section 7- - Revival of repealed Act. Section 8- -- Introductory. 44 "Before we advert to the Indian cases, the first thing that has to be remembered in this connection is that, the Prevention of Cot-ruptiot. Act being a temporary one, the Legislature would not have intended in the normal course of. things that a temporary statute like the one in question should supersede an enactment of antiquity, even if the matter covered the same ﬁeld. Under section (Stall of the General Clauses Act, it" by elilux of time, the period of a temporary statute, which had repealed an earlier statute, expires, there will not be a revival of the earlier one by the expiry of the temporary statute." 6.16. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 6 .4. should he revised as follows. Revised section 6A Where any Central Act or Regulation (other ﬁlter: u ternporary Ac! or Regulation} amends the/text of any Central Act or Regulation by the express omission, insertion or substitution of any matter, and the amending Central Act or Regulation is .t'ubseq1ten!ly repealed, then, unless a different intention appears, the repeal shall not aﬁect the continuance of any such amendment made by the Central Act or Rerrulation so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal. -6.17. to 6.20. We propose a new section to provide that where the title of any Central Act or Regulation is amended, then reference to that Central Act or Regulation by its old title. in any other enactment Act or Statutory instrument, shall be construed as references to it with its new title. The utility of such a provision is obvious. The new section should be as follows :--- Section 6B(New). "IISB. Where the short title of any enactment. being a Central Act or Regulation, is amended, then, references to that Central Art or Regulation by its old title in any other enactment or any statutory instrument shall, unless (I tiflferent intention appears, be construed as reference to it with its new title." Revival of repealed Acts. 6.21. Under section 7 , in any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, it shall be necessary, for the purpose of reviving, either wholly or partially, any enactment wholly or partially repealed, expressly to state that purpose. The section seems to need no change. Reference to repealed Acts 6.21A. We now come to section 3 , sub--seetion (1) which is as follows :--- "Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, repeats and re--enacts, with or without modiﬁcation, any provision of a former enactment, then references in any other enactment or in any instrument to the provision so repealed shall, unless a diﬁerent intention appears, be construed as references to the provisions so re--enacted. rineiples, has given rise to a number of questions. This section, though simple in its main 1: _ _ _ ut all of them illustrate its importance. Some of them do not necessitate any change, b l.--l'erhap5 the court had section 6A in mind. -..'-.'»1i' H?-ﬂ'€l&v:r-aw-viIﬂ|'H»'«m" 4-5 6.2113. Section 8(1) , it should be pointed out,' deals with the reference or citation of one The meaning and effect of incorporation by reference enactment is another without iiicorporotion. which point out this limitation of of one statute into another has been examined in several cases, section 8 . 6.22 Even so, the scope of section 8 is wide. For example when an Act passed bv the Union Parliament repeats? a State Act, then also section 8 applies; there is nothing in section 8 to indicate that "former enactment" means only a Central Act. 6.23. It may also he noted that section 3 does not require that the later Act repealing and re--enacting an earlier Act should he a repealing and amending Act? It does not matter that the new Act is not a repealing and amending Act, but an Act to deﬁne and amend the law relating to the particular subject. All that the section required is that a Central Act should repeal and ro--enact a former enactment, either with modiﬁcation or without it. 6.24. The expression "instru1neut" in the section has also given rise to a few interesting CREE- S. 6 .25. In at Bombay case," it was stated that the word "instrument", in its ordinary meaning means a document of a formal legal kind, which creates some right or liability. It is usually used in the sense of a document executed by or between the parties. An order of a Court cannot be said to be an instrument.'' In an earlier Bombay case," the High Court was not satisﬁed that an order of delegation can be deemed to be an "instrument" within the meaning of section 8 ; and it was conceded that it cannot be regarded as an enactment. 6.26. But the Supreme Court has now held? that the word "instrument" (in section 8 ) includes the Presidents order under article 359(1) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court, while so holding, noted that the word "instrnrnent" is some-times taken as meaning a formal document creating a right or liability fitter partes. The Supreme Court added: " ............. ..Bnt in the contest of the General Clauses Act , it has to be understood as including reierenec to a formal] legal writing like an order made under a statute or subordinate legislation or any document of a formal character made under constitutional or statutory authority. We have no doubt in our mind that the expression "instrument" in section 8 was meant to include reference to the Order made by the President in exercise of his constitutional powers." 62?. In a Delhi case} an important point concerning section 3 arose. A notiﬁcation issued by the State Government of Maharashtra had recorded the consent of the Maharashtra State to the investigation by the Delhi Special Police Establishment of offences speciﬁed in a notiﬁcation of the Government of India (issued under section 3 of the Delhi Special Police hstablishment Act). The notiﬁcation of the Govermnent of India was later repealed, and a new one' in supersession of it issued. But the lvialiarashtra State did not issue a fresh order notifying its consent with reference to the revised notiﬁcation of the Central Government. Consent of the State Government was, nevertheless, held to continue to be valid for purposes of the revised notiﬁcation also. Collector of Customs, Madms V. .'\1-2t'.".e!t'r2 Sanirzrzthu Cherry (1962) 3- S.C.R. 786; A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 316. State ofPIm_}'ob v. S..D.S'. Gupta, .-'1\.l.R. 1970 S.C. 1641-1642, para 4. . See Naroynn v. .':Ttamito'r'onat}1, A.l.R. I97-'2 Orissa lb, 11?. Bomt':.:2_-,- C.'irom'ct'e v. I/.B.Poia'nr, (1961) 63 Born. LR. 2312, 814 {Chainani C.J., Chandrachud 5.). . .)'o.-1'reIt' v. Jr)i't'J'e!I, H369) I_..i~'.. 7' Eq. 461, 463. . Emperor v. Rt!)-'ﬂI!g0IIdﬂ Kt't.-gattgotrda, _-'LI.R. I944 Bom. 259, 263', 46 Born. LR. 495. .»'l«fa-Imiz C'.I'zo;t-'d.fm,-).- v. Ct'ir'e_f'Comiiiis.-.'i'oner, L-'men Territory of Trr'pm'o. A.I.R. 1964, S.C. 173, N8, 1'79. _*-|O'\l.n:h-uJ3x.}i_- tiara ll. Advance i'its.'tt'rm't'e Co. t3ru'c."ri.x.'rza:', .X.l.R- 1959 D311'li 330: 347- 9313- 33 ('35-)- 9° Distinction between incorporation and mere reference. wide scope of section 3 . (State Act). Section 8 not conﬁned to repealing Acts. Meaning of :'tnsIrument" In section 8 . Supreme C_ourt's view. Reference in one statutory instrument to another statutory instrument. Need to make the language explicit. Need to confine the amendment to statutory instruments. Section 8 and Successive rcpcals. l?.econ1menda- tion to amend section 8 . 46 6.28. The High Court observed :-- "Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the said Notiﬁcation issued under section 3 has since then been repealed and superseded by another Notiﬁcation though in the New Notiﬁcation also all the offences which are 'racing investigated in the present. case are included. Learned counsel, however. argues that the repeal of the Notiﬁcation under section 3 which was referretl to in the consent letter prevents the Special Police from investigating this case. We see no force" in this argument. 1"he pririciple of section 8 of the General Ci.:tm;e Act would apply here? The letter of consent referred to the Notiﬁcation under section 3 which was in force when the consent letter was issued. The repeal of the said Notification and the issue of a new one in supersession of it would he like the repeal and re--enactmcnt of a statute. Under section 8 , the reference to the repealed enactment thereafter is to be construed as a reference to the rc--cnacted provisions. For the same reason. the reference in the consent letter would have to be construed as a reference to the Notification which has repealed the Notiiication referred to in the consent letter. It would be contrary to all principle to take the view that the State Government has to go on issuing new letters of consent rncreI;r because the Central Government chose to issue new Notiﬁcation under section 3 . In fact, the State Government may refuse to issue a new letter of consent on the ground that it wanted the consent to be restricted to the offences mentioned in the Notiﬁcation referred to in the consent' letter. The supcrseding Notiﬁcation may contain additional offences to the investigation of which the State Government may not wish the consent. In our opinion, therefore, the letter of consent continues to be valid, and it is so valid in the present case." ::i.29. We agree with the conclusion reached by the High Court? But we think that it would be better to make the language of the section explicit on this point. 6.30. At the same time. it is desirable to conﬁne the proposed amendment to statutory r'nsrrurm=:nt.i'." The General Clauses Act is not concerned with documents other than statutes and statutory instruments. Successive repeal: 6.31. We may', at this stage, deal with successive repeals. In the Allahabad case,' Chandra Bhushan. v. G'a_vatri Devi, the question arose whether section 3 of the General Clauses Act could be pressed into service in construing section 13 , Court Fees Act. which refers to section 351 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1859. The Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 has repealed and re-enacted (in Order 41, Rule 23), the provisions of section 5562. of the Code of 1882. The Code of 1908 did not itself repeal the Code of I859. it repealed the Code of 1832, which had repealed the Code of 1377, which, in turn, had repealed the Code of 1859. The High Court held that section 8 of the General Clauses Act was of no assistance in such a situation. It would be desirable to cover such a situation by making _an explicit provision on the subject. Recommendation as to .s'.-zctioiz 8. 6.32. St 6.33. In the light of the above discussion,-" we recommend that section 8(1) should be revised, and section Elf l-A} inserted, as follows:--- . Emphasis supplied. . Para 6.23. ,mpru. . See .supra para 6.24. Citrate':-ti B'l'm.r.fmrr v. Gayrm-i Dru'.-', A.l.R. 19059 All. 142, 152. . Para 6.18 to 6.3-l._ srrpra. 47 "S(I) Where this Act, or any Ccniral Act or Rugulation made after the commencement of this Act, repezals and re--cnacLs, with or withouL modiﬁcation, any provision of a former enactment, rfmi rc4;'ei'€irc-95 in {my usher 2nnr:I:m?m or in any statutory in.5trm-neazr Io the pmwr'5:'m-2 so 1-speciﬁed, or to the pron-'man Oil' any former enactmem .1':/;J:.=a!c*cf and re--emTc.rc'r! by tire moi-'i5for2 .m r€;:ec.'!:m', .5ImH_. uHfea'5 n r!i'ﬂ'erem' intention appears, he consuucil as references to thc provision so ra~enacted." "(I-A') Where cm).-' .!-'m2'mur_i' :'.Ir.s'rrimm2r re.sr:r'.r'm'.-; om? re-1'11c'c.-:'pc'JmIr35, with or without Ir-Jrzdfficarion, any pm1"£.sfon of [J former 3.fa!u£or'_1-' inst:-'Im.'<'.!J.', ﬂier? reference'.s' in any er-Iau:'I.-rzem.' or in {my Other' 5IaIr.r2'or_'r r'm.frumer-1'! :0 (he pmvfﬁon so .-'escinded. or to Er'2c' _um1=:.?r'0H of any farrnw .5Ia!tu(Jr'_\' in5!rtrmer1.' i'e._-.c'i.Im'e'c." am!' re-iiicorprwahfd hf.' the praw'5a'un so re.s'c:i:m'ec2', shriff, mr!r=.s.s' a dEﬂea'ern' it-i.fen::'-A:-2 appears. he ::.'0n.s'tru£a' references to the pro1----'r'Sz'0n so 1'6-eH(rcred." Section SA (new)-- Expiry of Temporary Acts. Perpetual and temporary Acts. English law. as to repeal. Effect of repeat and effect of expiry. CHAPTER 7 "!'£;'MPORA RY ACTS JWTRODUCTOR Y 7.]. We now proceed to discuss a subject which not dealt with in the present Act, the expiry of temporary Acts. We propose a new section on the subject} It would be desirable to explain the background of the new section in some detail. At present, in the absence of provisions as to the expiry of temporary Acts, considerable dilllculty arises. No doubt, in each particular Act which is intended to be temporary, usually a saving clause is inserted; but, there might be cases where the draftsntan omits to do so through inadvcrtence." Since the situation is a recurring one, it would be convenient if the General Clauses Act contains a suitable provision. The matter requires a detailed discussion of several aspects. 7.2. "Every statute for which no time is limited is called a perpetual Act," as the {supreme Court. observed;-"' A perpetual Act continues in force until it is repealed. It is, however, to be noted that no statute can be literally perpetual, that is to say, incapable of being repealed. Temporary Acts are those on the duration of which some limit is put by the Legislature. They continue in force {unless sooner repealed} until the expiration of the time fixed for their duration. The Corpus .fttri.r Secruzduriri deﬁnes a temporary statute as one which is limited merely in its duration. or which is limited in its operation for a particular period of time after its enactment. Repeal and expiry compared 7.3. Under the law of England, as it stood prior to the Interpretation Act of 1889, the effect of a repealing statute was to obliterate it as completely from the records of Parliament "as if it had never been passed, except for the purpose of these actions which were commenced, prosecuted and concluded while it was an existing law.' To obviate the results which would follow a repeal without more, a practice came Into existence in England of inserting a saving clause in the repealing statute with a "view to preserving rights and liabilities already accrued or incurred under the repealed enactment. Later on, to dispense with the necessity of having to insert a saving clause on each occasion, section 38(2) was inserted in the Interpretation Act, 1889?" Section of our Act corresponds to section 38 of the English Act, dealing with repeat. 7.4. if the cﬁect of the repeal of :1 statute (without a savings clause) was to obliterate the repealed statute as completely from the records of Parliament as if it had never been passed,' the effect of expiry of a temporary statute also could not, in principle, be in any way different. The decided at1thorities*- show that the general rule in regard to the expiration of a temporary . Section 8A[new]. . Para 7.11, !:;!_J'i"c1. Hansrr.-_,i Moolji 1:. Store of Bombay, AIR 1957 SC 497, 500, Para. 14. Corpus Jnris Secundum, Vol. 83, p. 930. . Sec .-*t.l.R. IFJ-55 S.C. 84, 87. A-..l.R. I955 84, .'l'.'. Para T-'.3, .supm_ . la') .-'t.l.R. 1947 I-'.('.'. 3-8, 41. th) A.1.R. 1939 S.C. 609, tilt'). GO.-ul-_3'\'~.1'\J'a.'..,4[.)._. 48 -A-1-"I-ln'.*-.rnn:'-.|:<»i-t.'n=s."::'-:2. 49 statute is that (unless the statute contains some special provision to the contrary), after a temporary Act has expired. no proceedings can be taken upon it and it ceases to have any further effect. Therefore. offences committed against te:11p(irat'_y Acts nmst be prosecuted and punished before the Act expires, and as soon as the Act expires, any proceedings which are being taken against a person will form _focm terminate. In one judgment' of the Supreme Court, the repeal of a perpetual statute is almost equated with the expiry of El temporary statute. It is observed. "nth-an a statute is repealed or comes to an end by efllux of time, no prosecution for acts done during the continuance of the repealed or cxpiried Act can be commenced alter the date of its repeal or expiry, because that would amount to the enforcement of a repealed or dead Actf'. 7.4A. It may, in this connection, he stated that Lord Thring'~' called attention to the advisability of including, in any temporary Act which imposes penalties, a provision that offences and obligations incurred before the expiration of the Act might be punished or enforced after- words. Perhaps, in pursuance of this advice. British and Indian statutes have used, in relation to the expiration of a temporary Act. the expression 'except as respects things done or omitted to be done', so that offences and obligations incurred under a temporary Act might be punished or enforced even after its expiry. Even the Constitution of India, in articles 249(3) , 250(2) , 357(2) and 358 , has used this expression. The Government of India Act, 1935 , used this expression in section 102(4). It is on the basis of this expre:~1si.on that the House of Lords held in Wicks v. Director of Public Prorectm'on.r,3 that the expiration of the Emergency Powers (Defence) Act, 1939 did not affect the lability to punishment under the statute or the prosecution of legal proceedings for the purpose of inflicting that punishment. There are two Supreme Court cases explaining the meaning of the expression 'thing done'.*-" The above discussion is intended to show the need for a savings provision as to the effect of expiry of a temporary Act. Present position».-Need for unread':-nent 7.6. In the United Kingdom, there is no statutory provision concerning the effect of expiry. At oommon law, the effect of expiry of a temporary statute is. in each case, a matter of oonstruction."--"' The savings provision applicable by section 33(2) of the Interpretation Act, 1389 (U.K..) in case of repeal?' does not apply on the expiry of an Act, of its own force. Current English legislative practice is to apply the repeal clause. The following is one example :' "{2} Upon the expiry of this Act, section 38(2) of the Interpretation Act shall apply as if this Act had been repealed by another Act." The correct position in relation to temporary Acts was stated by Spens C]. in J. K. Gas Plant v. King Emperor ,"' in which he cited with approval the following passage from Craies on Statute Law." . A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 683, 685. . Tliring, Practical Legislation, page 100. . Wicks v. Director ofPut'1Ir'c Prosecutions, (1947) A.C. 362 (I-I.L.}. . Unit-arm! Imports Agency v. Chief Controller, A.I.R. I961 S.C. 41. . French India Irnporrirtg Corporation v. Chief Controller', A.l.R. 1961 SC. 1752. . See.--- {a) Stevensoit v. Oliver, (1841) S M & W 234, 240, 241; (in) Spent-or v. Hooton (1920) 37 T.L.R. 280, 282; {c) Wick: v. Director of'Prrb!r'c Prosectitioirs (1947) A.C. 362. 7. As to the general rule, sec para T-'.4, supra. 8. Para 7.3, .-ru,oJ'o. 9. Section 9, Control of Liquid Fuel Act, 196? (E.ng.}_ ID. J'.K. Gas Plant V. King Emperor, (1947) 52 C.\'V.N. (F.[{.) 25. 11. Craics, Statute Law {Fourth Edn. p. 347'; Sixth Edn. p. 403). ¢,\|-n_;-_~.t.i.tr~.'D»--- Advice of Lord Thring. No statutory orovision in UK. as to expiry. Repeal of perpetual Act and expiry of temporary Act-Similarity between. Provision in Bill of 1897'. Position as to expiry of temporary Acts in India. 50 " ............. ..unless it contains some special provision to the contrary, after a temporary Act iltis expired. no proceedings can be taken upon it and it ceases to have any effect. Therefore. offences eonintittctl against tcntporary Acts must be prosecuted and punished before the Act expires. and as soon as the Act expires any proceeding which are being taken against a person will ipso facto terminate." 7.6. Thus, a perpetual Act and a tcmporar_v Act stand on the same looting, first, when they are in force, and secondly, when a perinament Act is repealed or a temporary Act expires by efflux of time, as the case I'l"l1l'_\-' be. Then, the qticstioit arises whether we should have a general saving clause to deal with the expiry of a temporary Act more or less hire the one which has already been provided for in section 6 in relation to repeal. As in the case of repeal without a saving clause} so in the ease of expiry" of a temporary Act without a saving clause, it is not diﬁicult to conceive how, such an expiry might result in defeating the ohiect for which the tem- porary Act was enacted. Regard being had to the fact that the legislative power in the exercise of which a temporary Act is enacted is the same as in the case of a perpetual Act, there cannot by any insuperable or inherent tlifﬁculty in a temporary Act creating rights surviving beyond the actual expiry. 7.7. It may be mentioned here that a provision on this subject was made in the General Clauses Bill. 1897'. as originally introduced," but it was dropped at the Select Committee stage.' in deleting the provision, the Select Committee observed :---- "It may be that without any provision it would be held that the effect is the same when an enactment. expires as and when it is repealed; but, on the other hand, it is conceivable that there might be cases in which, for example, it would he better not to allow a person to be proceeded against after the expiry of a temporary and possibly very stringent enactment, although he acted in contravention of it during the period for which it was expressed to endure." With respect, we do not think that the reasons given by the Select Committee of 1897, quoted above for the deletion of the provision, are sound. ' The first assumption in the Cornmittcefs observations, equating the repeal of an enactment with its expiry, has not been accepted either in Indian" or in English" law. The second proposi- tion, referring to some 'very stringent' enactments, seeks to make an exceptional case the basis for a general rule. We ﬁnd it dillicult to conceive of cases where the legislation would intend and provide that an offence committed against the temporary law may cease to be punishable on its expiry. On principle, even if a law is stringent, an offence committed during its operation should be punished even after its expiry. 7.8. The position in Indian law as to the effect of the expiry of temporary Acts, which we have already discussed,' is thus understood :5 . Para 7.4, .mprr:. . Para 1' .5, .2.-rrprn. . See Clause 6(2), General Clauses Bill, 13 Notes at pages 38.40. . Report of the Select Committee, Gazette of Indi 9?, Gazette of lndia, Part V, pages 25 .37, dated 6th Feb.. 1397 and Ln-IF)--- a, Part V, pages 'T-'7'.'H:t_. dated 6th March, 1897. _ See para 7 . Ft. infra. . See para 7.9, infra. . Para 7 .3 and 7.4. mpm. Sce- (a} Krishrrai: v'. State of (in) State v. Jagrzrrzanduar Dos, A.|.R. _G0-.lchLh_;. Ilrfartras, A..1.R. 1951 S.C. 301, 304 (I951) S.C.R. I321; (per Fatanjali Sastri J,}_ 1954 S.C. 633', {[955] SC A539. (cl State of Pwyiab v. _-'l-tohnr ,S'r'i-rgir, (1955) S.C-.R. 85; ( cl) Gapichand v. Delhi .»1dm1'm'sIm!t'arr, A.l.R. I959 S.C. 609. ._....._ .._--._.~ _ _M__, -....u.n.u_.... . .-i.___.._.--..u~..,_ ...'-2.»-t_;.......'........._.._,_ ____ H-._..... ....._ 51 Unless the temporary Act contains some special provision to the contrary, no proceeding can be taken upon a temporary Act after its expiry, and it ceases to have any further eﬁeet. Therefore, otfences committed against temporary Acts must be prosecuted and punished before the Act expires, and as soon as the Act expires, any proceedings which may have been taken against a person will ipso facro terminate. 7.9. The position in England is the same.'-9 7.10. In drafting an Act which is to expire after a certain period, care must, therefore. be gigitghlﬁi taken, as the law stands at present, to provide that any right, obligation or penalty accrued or drafﬁng_ incurred during the period of the operation of the Act shall not be aﬁected, and that any investiga- tion, legal proceeding or remedy in respect thereof may be instituted, continued or enforced, and such penalty imposed, as if the Act had not expired. 7.11. The failure to insert a proper saving clause has sometimes resulted in a serious offence Failure to_ going unpunished. An instance in point is the case reported in State of Urtar Pradesh v. 'C'i'::':e_ﬁf';';3 Jagamander Dn.t.3. It is true that there was considerable delay on the part of the investigating of. agency in that case ; but, if there had been a general saving provision in the General Clauses Act . the serious offence in that case would not have gone unpunished. 7.12. The usual practice of inserting a saving clause in temporary Acts,' and the serious Speciﬁc BT0- oonsequenccs which result where such a saving provision is either not inserted or is inadequate} mm" Hamid'. would, in our opinion, justify the inclusion in the General Clauses Act of a general provision dealing with the eifect of expiry of temporary Acts. We are conscious that we are recommending a radical change; but we are satisﬁed that the ends of just require it. Outlines of amendments 1.13. Having discussed the need for a provision dealing with the expiry of temporary Acts, Qutﬁngg of we now proceed to consider the lines on which it should run. |r':l':ﬁII"1'g°'g!i°" expiry of temporary Acts. 7.14. We have a precedent in section 6 , which deals with repeat. In general, principles Prigginim which apply in the case of repeal of a permanent Act should. on so far as the nature of a temporary iggeﬁaglggll, Act permits apply to its expiry. avblicable. There are two ways of utilising section 6 for the purpose: (i) a section applying section 6 {which deals with repeal) to temporary Acts on the lines of current English procedure," or '(ii) a self--contaiued section which will reproduce the contents of section 6 in relation to temporary Acts. Of course, whichever course is adopted, it will have to be borne in mind that some parts of section 6 cannot be applied to temporary Acts. Thus, clause (a) of section 6 , regarding non- revival of a repealed Act, should not apply in the case of expiry of temporary Acts. If section 6(a) is applied, the result might be that where a temporary Act repeals any provision of a permanent Act, the repealed provision will not revive on the expiry of the temporary Act,----a situation which may be, and usually is, contrary to the intention of the legislature. But there is no diﬁiculty in applying the other clauses of section 6 to the expiry of temporary Acts. . Wicks v. Director ofPerblr'c Prosecutions, (1947) A.C. 362 {I-I.L.). . See also para 7.5, supra. State of U.P. V. Jrrgrrlirmdrzr Dar, A.l.R.. 1954 S.C. 533; (1955) S.C.A. 539. Para 7 .4, .rupr:;;r. . Para 7'. ll. supra. . Para 7 . 5, .-,.'r,.'.rJ'."r. l5 M of Law.".-'4--'i: Form of amendrnent considered. Self-contained section preferred. Express uro- visiou to the contrary pro- vided for. Expiry of Ordinances. 52 7.15. The question, then, is whether section 6 should be applied by reference--[altertiative (i) a'oove1]--or whether the new section should he self--contained--[alternative (ii) above] 7.16. We think" that it would be more convenient to have a self-contained section as to the cﬁect of the expiry of temporary Acts, instead of applying. by reference, the section relating to repeal,--though the letter was the course proposed in the General Clauses Bill, 1897.34 Referential legislation lead-"- to unforeseen tlillicultles, and we think that in the case of an important provision like the one under consitlcration. such a position should be avoided. We may observe that the provision which we recommend will be the converse of the constitutional provision' barring a prosecution for an oﬂencc under a law not in force at the time when the offence was committed notwithstanding the later enacnnent of such a law. Under the proposed section it will be permissible to prosecute a person for an offence committed while the law was in force. notwithstanding the later e.rpiry of that law. 7.17. We have made the proposed new section subject to an express provision to the contrary. No doubt. as we have already stated," it is dilﬁcult to conceive of cases where the legislature would intend that an offence against a temporary law should, after its expiry, cease to be punishable. Norntally, the cxpirg.-' of an Act should not prevent prosecutions thereunder. However, since the scheme of the Act is to leave scopc for a different intention in every provision, it appeared to us that an exception should, in the new section, be made at least for express provision to the contrary. 7.13. While we have thought ﬁt to apply, with modiﬁcations. the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act. I897, to the expiry of temporary Acts.' we have not extended this principle to the expiry of Ordinances. Under article 123(2) of the Constitution an Ordinance ceases to operate on the expiry of six weeks from the re-assembly of Parliament. To a layman, an Ordinance shares the same character as a temporary Act. The words "cease to operate" in article 123(2) have not been judicially interpreted. But it seems that at the expiry of six weeks, an Ordinance is completely obliterated from the Statute Book, except for the saving expressly made by the Constitution. It may be pointed out that article 123(2) does not use the words "except as regards things done" etc. The Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Bhupendra Kumnrﬂ made the following pertinent observations . "It is true that the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act in relation to the etlcct of repeal do not apply to a temporary Act. As observed by Patanjali Sastri, .l. as he then was, in S. Krishna v. State of Madras ," the general rule in regard to a temporary statute is that in the absence of special provision to the contrary, proceed- ings which arc being taken against a person-under it will ipso facto terminate as soon as the statute expires. That is why the Legislatures can, and often does, avoid such an anomalous consequence by enacting in the temporary statute a saving provision the effect of which is in some respects similar to that or section 6 of the General Clauses Act. Incidentally, we ought to add that. it may not be open to the Ordinance making authority to adopt such a course because of the obvious limitation imposed on the said authority by Article 213(2) ta) ." ln this position, we think that it will not be safe to apply the provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act to the expiry of Ordinance, and it is doubtful if the proposed section (as the effect of expiry) can be legally made applicable, in view of the provisions of the Constitutlmt. l. Para 7.12, supra. 3. See also para 7.20, irlﬂw. 3. Section 6(2) of the General Clauses Bill, Gazette of India, 139'.' (6th Feb. i897], Part V, pages 25-37. -'1. See. also para 7.7', supra. 5. Article 20 of the Constitution. 6. Para 7.7, supra. 7. Para T-'. 13 to 7.17, .rt:pra. 8. State of Or.-'.sra v. B.l:upen.:2'rn Kronor, A.l.R. 1962 SC. 952. 9. 5'. ﬂ'r'.I.'}t.Irttr1 v. State .9_f.-'lxfrtdrm {I951} S-.C.R. 52I ; A.l.R. l95l S.C. I'-Cl]. .- '»';,i.-'- .7 . 53 Qualitatively, an Ordinance ceasing to operate under the Constitution differs from a temporary Act which expires by aﬂlux of time. Parliament never applied its mind to the Ortlmance which ceased to operate under the Constitution. if emnzriicixrfntfcmn 7.19. In the light of the above discussion, the new section what we recommend will deal with the eﬂect of expiry of temporary Acts only. Some of the noteworthy points in connection with the pI'0p0E~'Cd section may be repeated, tor convenience: ' ' (i) The proposed section will not apply to the expiry of Ordinances.' (ii) Assistance. has been taken in drafting the scction from section 6 . But clause'-(a) of section 6 (regarding non--revivaI) has not been adopted, since it should not apply' in cases of expiry? (iii) Instead of merely providing that section 6 will apply in relation to expiry. the proposed section re--states the provisions intended to be applicable on expiry.' It may again to pointed" out that the mere application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act to a temporary Act (without reproducing, "with adjustments, the detailed savings), would create diﬁiculties, and may not produce the desired result. As was observed in a Calcutta case," where a temporary Act is repealed and replaced by a new Act. section 5 ? of the Bengal General Clauses Act (which corresponds to section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 189?) may not achieve the object of saving the operation of the temporary Act, because the expression "as if the repealed Act had not been passed" can be construed in a rat.her norrow manner. It would save the life of the Act only for the period upto the date of expiry. in the sense that its subsequent expiry is not to be taken as having wiped it off completely as if it had never been born. Whatever was done during its duration will not be rc--openeti, and that would be the only effect of the expression; once the date of expiry is gone, the temporary Act would have expired, and the words "as if the repealed Act etc." would not authorise any acﬁon after its ezttpiigr, because of the ordinary principles applicable as to the effect of expiry of temporary Acts. 7.20. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of the following new section:---- Section 6-A (New) 8- -A. Where a temporary Central Act or a temporary Regulation made on or after the. . ................... ..day of.............._...............expires,7 then, in the absence of an express provision to the contrary, the expiry shall not eFfect---- (a) the previous operation of,-or anything duly done or suffered under, the temporary Act or Regulation; (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired. accrued or incurred under the temporary Act or Regulation; (c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred under the temporary Act or Regulation; . See para 7.18, Supra. . See discussion in para 7.14, .s'upm. . Hence section 30 will not mention the new section. See discussion in para 7.16. .s'u'pra_ . See also para 7. I6, .'mprr.r. - TWWC Clwmlm MMk='I¢'?'it9r! and others v. Rama : Lat' Gtroral' and others, A.L.R. 1957' Cat 257'. . Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted. Salient points of the recommendation. Recommenda- t1Dl1. Effect of expiry of temporary Act. Section 8-3 (New) Time of expiry etc. Time of expiry of temporary Act: etc. Position as to_ expiry of Ordi- nance. 54- (d} any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such_ investigation legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as it the temporary Act or Regulation had not expired. Time of Expiry 7.21. As regards temporary Acts, there is another point to be considered. Just as the exact time of the commencement of an enactment is dealt with in section 5 , it is desirable that the exact time of the expiry of a temporary Act should also be laid down. A new section on the subject is, therefore, recommended. 7.2.2. The new section will be conﬁned to new Acts, as the formula embodied in it may not ﬁt in with some of the temporary Acts already passed.' The section should be as follows:--- Scction 8-5 (New) 3-0. Where a Central Act or Regulation made on or after the . . . . . . . . . . . . ..day of . .......... ..................... ..is expressed" to expire, lapse or otherwise cease to have effect on a particular day, then it shall, unless the contrary intention is expressed, be construed as ceasing to have effect immediately on the expiration of the day immediately preceding that day. 7.23. Section 4(2) of the Canadian Uniform interpretation" Act provides that "where an enactment is expressed to expire, lapse or otherwise cease to have effect on a particular day, it shall cease to have eﬁect immediately on the commencement of the following day." The section which we proposed will express the same idea but will adopt the language used in section 9(3) . 7.24. The new section will not be applicable to Ordinance promulgated by the President under article 123- of the Constitution. Such Ordinance either (i) lapse on the expiry of six weeks from re--assernbly of Parliament, or (ii) come to an end by virtue of disapproval by Parliament, or (iii) terminate on withdrawal. 7.25. First, when the Ordinance ceases to operate on the expiry of six weeks, article 123(2) (:1) of the Constitution comes into play, under which the Ordinance "shall cease to operate" at the expiration of six weeks from the re-assembly of the Parliament. [The Rangoon High Court has held} after discussion of the case--law_. that as the law does not take into account fractions of a day, an Ordinance promulgated under section 4-l(2}(a] of the Government of Burma Act, 1935 (25 Geo. 5, ch. 22) (which provided that an Ordinance shall cease to operate at the expiration of six weeks from the reassembly of the Legislature) expired on the rnid--night of 28-29th March, 1940, (which is six weeks from mid-night of 15-16th February, 1940, the Legislature having re--assernblcd on 15th February, 194-0). The Court negatived the contention that, as the House had re--assemb1ed at 11.00 AM. on the 15th February, 1940, therefore, the Ordinance expired at 11.00 A.M. on the 28th March]. 7.26. Secondly, if the Ordinance comes to an end because of disapproval by both Houses, then under article l23(2)(a), last portion, is ceased to operate "upon the passing of the second of those resolutions". 7.27. Thirdly, regarding withdrawal of an Ordinance under article 123(2) (in) , the with- drawal can be made "at any time" by the President. . E.-C. See Delhi Control of_ Building Operations Act',-1mE)tii. . Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted. _ D1-tagger, Composition of Legislation (1956), page 256. . U. Lun v. U Chi: hinting A.l.R. 1941 Rangoon S, 14, expressly approved on this point in A.I.R. 1941, Rangoon, 49, 50- -Rial}-J-- F ...u...-.. jv CHAPTER 3 OTHER GENERAL RULES OF CONSTRUCTION Expressions cnimected with time 8.1. We have so far discussed some important general rules of construction. In this Introductory- Chapter, we shall deal with o-ther general rules of construction. We ﬁrst take up expressions connected with time. 8.2. Section 9 , deals with the commencement and termination of time, is really Sect_iei:i9-- Cﬂnﬁllﬂ-£1_ to only W-'t.1 L'X15rES5i0_I15. tIan1ely_.."from"' and "to". Stated in a simpliﬁed form, the §£_'§°.'.'f1f,'gn?l¥1;I;f" proposition enacted in the section is that if the legislature uses the expression "from" a series"to". of days (or any other period of time), the ﬁrst day in that series (or period) is to he excluded; and similarly, if it uses the expressions "'to" a series of days or any other period of time, the last day in that series is excluded. 8.2.A. It should be noted that the preposition ''from'' used in connection with an event The gxpfeggioﬁ may have various meanings. These are three possible points of time on and from which the ;g§'i:;"i;'$'5°"' change in law (indicated by the substantive words which are preceded by this preposition) anzﬂyscd, could take effect' i.n such cases. The ﬁrst is that moment of time when the event takes place. The second is the commencement of the day on which the event takes place. The third is the end of that day, (or the beginning of the next day which describes precisely the same point of time). Barwick C. J. has dealt with the matter elaborately, in the Australian case of Associated Beauty Aids Private Ltd v. Conitrtissioner of Taxation" and stated the position in these words : "There is no general rule as to the consequence of the use of the preposition 'from', whether it be in the computation of the period of time, or in any other con- nection. In general, in computing a period of time from a date, the period will commence at the end of the day of that date, but there is no universally operating rule to that effect, see, for example, the illustration given in the note at p. 1068 of the report or R. v. Stet-'ens and Agnew" (1804), 102 E.R. I063, and Wilkiitson. v. Gaston} When, as here, a change is to take place from a stated time, the general "rule" as to the computation of a period of time is not of direct signiﬁcance, though it is illustrative of the separating effect of the preposition ''from''. In my opinion, it does not usually have an inclusive but rather an exclusive or separatist quality. But un- questionably it may have either. Thus, the preposition derives its relevant quality from the context in which it is found, which includes the purpose which the document in which it is found is evidently designed to effect." 8.21}. Two aspects of the matter should be noted at this stage. For the speciﬁc situationhioaspects dealt with in section 9 , the rule enacted in that section prevails, and the ﬁrst day is excluded.°"h"m""""' In situations not dealt with in section 9 , however, the question is to be decided as one of construction as the positive provision in section 9 is not, in terms applicable. 1. cf. analysis in .4;-sat-i'ate;E Beauty Aids' Pvt. Ltd. v. Coimiiisstoizer of Taxation. (1965-66) 39 A.L.J.R. 20. 21 (Barwic!-t (,'.J.). 2. Assaciriiet! Beauty .4i'ii'.-.: Pvt. Ltd. v. Coiiiiiii'.>s'i'ottei' of Taxation, (1965-66) 39 A.L..l.R. 20, 21. 3-. R. v. .S'reveiis'attd.4g'iiew, UBO-4), 102 HR. 1063, 1068. -1., I-Pifkiiriaii v. Giistwt, (1346) 9 QB. H7', H5 E..R. I327. 55 Para. 8.23 contd. Laymarfs under- standing different Other expressions relating to tirne. 56 A Madras case---In re Cour! fees'.----illustrates the position. in that Case, a question arose as to the interpretation of a notiﬁcation of the Provincial Government, published in the Gazette of May 5th. which contained rules imposing higher court fees on plaints. Did the new scales apply to suits instituted on that day'? That was the precise question. The words of the notiﬁcation were. "that the ainenrlnients do come into force from the date of publication in the Gazette". Did those words mean 'on and after that date",----thus including the St}: Ma,\=--or did tlicy mean "after that date",--thus excluding May, the 5th. The majority tool: the former view. Schwabo C J. said, "In every case, the word "from" preceding a date may have one of two meanings. namely. on and after, that is, including the named date, or merely after, that is. excluding the namctl date; it is necessary to look at the context and the cir- cumstances of each case to arrive at the true construction. But I think further that, unless there are valid reasons to the contrary, certain rules may be stated thus: {a} that, if the named date is- the "beginning of a cieﬁmfze limited 'peri'nd"'" that is. when there is a rerrninus ad qtiem as well as a terminus ill' qua, then prima their the first day is excluded; (b) that, if the named date is the beginning of an indeﬁnite period, then, prime facfe, the ﬁrst day is included. '*1 am of opinion that in ordinary plan English, unless there is anything indicating the contrary intention in the context, "from a named date" means "on and after that day". In the same case", Courts Trotter J. elaborated the position thus :-- "Where. a statute fixes only the terminus' a quo of :1 state of things which is envi- saged as to last indeﬁnitely, the common law rule obtains that you ought to include fractions of a day and that statute or order or regulation takes effect from the ﬁrst moment of the day on which it is enacted or passed, that is to say, from the mid-night "of the day preceding the day on which it is promulgated"; on the other hand. when: a statute delimits the period marked both by at terminus a quo and a rernzinus ad quem. the former is to be excluded and the latter to be "included in the reckoning."" Hrishnaswami Aiyar 1., however, took the View that the notiﬁcation took effect only on the next day, i.e. on the 6th May. We are referring to this case for its discussion of the princip1es,--though the case fell outside the terms of section 9 , because there was no "series of days or other period of time" as is contemplated by section 9 . 8.3. We have considered at some length section 9 in so Jar as it deals with the expres- sion ''from'', which, under the section, excludes the first day. This is also the rule in England. laid down judicially, and we do not wish to disturb it, as it has been in operation for almost a century. Nevertheless, we would like to point out that. this is not the layman": understanding of the word. In ordinary usage--whether in conversation or in correspondence or even in formal documents---one regards the day mentioned as included in the period which begins from a particular day, and the object of using "from" is to link the period with that day. The dominant idea, in section 9 , on the other hand. is of detaching the period from that day. 8.4. Besides the expressions provided for in section 9, modern legislative phraseology has --occasion to- use many other expressions dealing with the commencement or termination of T periods of time; and it appears to be desirable,---in so far as it is practicabIe----to lay down certain rules as to the eﬁcct of those words and expressions. so as to have a uniformity of. interpretation, which is one of the objects of the Act. Acting on this principle, we shall deal with a few words and expressions, such as, "clear days", "within" etc. 1. In re Courrfees, A.I.R. 1924 Mad. 251'. [J . Emphasis supplied. . In re C'our'rfee.r, A.l.R. i934 Mad 7-57- 3 4. See also Haisbury, 3rd Ed- Vol. 32. page 133- i-Liﬁif'-'-'r.. . . . 5'? 8.5. (a') As regards the phrase "clear days". which is often employed in statutes, it is "'~'|=8l' dd?!"- well settled that where this phrase is used. the time is to be reckoned exclusive of both the ﬁrst and the last day.' U') Wl1'3I'£*- liowcvcr. the expression used is something else than "clear days" (or "at least" or "not less" so many days). the general rule obtaining at present seems to be that the first day is included, and the last day excluded.' 816. As to the expression "within . . . . . . ..of"_. reference may be made to the Allahabad "Within .... .. case of K. N. Pniidey v. 5'. 1.. Snrenrr." In that case, an application for substitution under""°f" section 1113(3) (C) of the Representation of the People Act was required to be filed "within 14 days" of the publication of the notice of withdrawal of candidature. On this statutory lan- guage the ﬁrst day was held to be excluded. It was noted that section 9 of the General Clauses Act could not apply, as the word "of" was used But the court placed reliance on the principle of section 1210'). Limitation Act . 8.7. (a) The expression "within . . . . . _ . _ . _ . . . . ..after" came up for consideration in a"Within after" Bombay case.* The words used were "within 15 days 'after' the date of declaration of the ?lf:;'m",","hl" election result". The date of declaration was held to be excluded, because 15 days contem- plated are after that day. (b) The words 'within 15 days from the due date of payment". occurring in section 12-A(1) of the Bihar and Orissa Motor Vehicles Act. I930, were held, in an Orissa case," to mean 15 clear days excluding the day on which the tax become due] In another deci- sion", it was held that the words "within a month" should ordinarily be construed as excluding the date on which the order was passed. and would mean an interval of one clear month. 8.8. It is only when the word "from" is used (with reference _to the computation of a "From" particular period} thatpthe date from which the computation is to begin is excluded from $i't'lh.i:°"di"3 the computation.' But, if the expression in such context is either "beginning with" or "ending with", then those dates are not required to be omitted from the computation} 5.9. It may, incidentally, be noted that section 9 of the General Clauses Act has been Section9applicd applied for computing the period of limitation also." 1fi':,'1'n.:::'i'-:')':1'f""3 8.10. While it is not our intention to codify all the numerous points summarised ab0Ve,:'\.mendments we think it proper to give statutory recognition t.o some of them. The amendments which "":°'""'°"d"d' we recommend in section 9 will be apparent from the draft..'"--1" We may also mention that we propose to extend the section to statutory instruments. 8.11. Recent legislative usage occasionally employs the verbal device "both days inclusive" "Expression It would, we think, be convenient if, in order to recognise this device, the General Clauses Act . suitably spells out the consequences of using it. Where a period from a speciﬁed day ' to I speciﬁed day is referred to and the formula "both days inclusive" is used, the period should include both the days. This is the proposition to be enacted. We recommend the insertion in section 9 of a suitable provision in this behalf. 1. Strouc], Judicial Dictionary (1952), Vol. I. page 500, item No. 16. . Rarfcllﬁ? -u. Bat-tholoiiirrrw t ls')?! 1 K-13. 16l- . Kn"-'. Panda} I.'. 3.1.. 5tr.:te'rttr, ;"\.[.R. 1959 All. 54. {I953} ."i.i_J. 673, I530. . ilfnrtjttli V. ('t'I»'i'l Judge, A.l.R. i970 Born. 1. 3, para l8. .l'aalmttci'iar'an v. .5'.C. Pubs, A.l.R.. 1965 Orissa Tl, 7'2, Para 2 (Narasimhan CJ. and Batman 1.). filo ".'.t.rdr .'S'rtlrt.t v. Lo} .S'a-.'f;rrr(intIa Singiz, .-5i.l.R. I952'. Orissa E79. . Para 8.1, supm. . .-"v'r.u'}i(J \.-'. Sttal PI'i't.irrr'4'. .~'\.l.R.. l9'5-9 Pat. 310- . Hhogilal Prmd__m xi. .-lJm'ttzr:ru'trI La.t'ma.Ii Srhglt, A.l.R. I963, Raj. 145. . See draft Bill. ill the entl {if this Report. .1:1tl also para 3. I2, infra, . Also see part 8. l !. i'n,r'i'a. r-assoc-o-.1-_3\;.r-.r-_i.-2:4 S8 ﬁfrwrgggzgdllion 6.12. In the light of the above discussion, section 9 should be revised as under :~---- section 9 . Revised section 9 Expression: of 9(1). In any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the commencement of this Act, t":"°' or in anr statutory instrument made thereunder, it shall he suﬂicient--~ fal to use the word ''from'' or the word 'after" for the purpose of excluding the ﬁrst in a series of days ; . . . . . . . . . . . . (h) to use the word "to" for the purpose of including t.he last in a series of days . . . . . . HA] In any Central Act or Regulation made on after the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..19'l ,1 or in any statutory it-rstruntent made thereunder, it shall be suﬁ1cient----- ta': to use the word "on" for the purpose of including the day on which 81 period is expressed to begin ;. . {b) to use the word "with" for the purpose of including the day on which a period is expressed to end :. . (c) in relation to the interval between two evenrs---- lil to use the words "clear days" or the words "at least" or "not less than" 'a speciﬁed number of days, for the purpose of excluding the days on which the events happen ; and (ii) merely to specify the number of data: for the purpose of excluding the day on whirl: the first event happens and including the day on which the second event happens. {IE}. Where in any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..9 or in any statutory ft'h§'l'l'Il1II€I'l.I made under any such Central Act or Regulation, .11 period from a speciﬁed day to a speciﬁed day is referred to, followed by the words "both days inclusive", the period shall include both the days. (2) Sub-section (1) applies also to all Central Acts made after the third day of January, 1868, and to all Regulations made on or after the forteenth day of January, 1887, and to statutory instruments made under such Central A(.'I.£' or Regulations. Section 10 3 .13. This disposes of section 9 . Section 10 provides that where any act or proceeding . ' is directed or allowed to be done or taken in any court or oﬁice on a certain day or within Ii prescribed period. and the court or ofﬁce is closed on that day or on the last day of the period, the acl. or proceeding can be done or taken on the next day aftertliards on which the court or oﬁice is open. 8.14. It may be noted that the section has been applied to a provision where the period "not later than". A similar provision in the U.P. General Clauses Act was pronouncing the award of an industrial tribunal." 10 3PP1'°3l-"1° WM" was described as expremion "not . . . . ]atu--[]mn"u3gd_ applied to the time-limit ﬁxed for 1. Date of commencement of the unending Act to be entered. 2. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be iI1S€l'l¢Cl- 3_ p*;5-pm.-anritru Press V. Workers of Vishwonlirru Press, A.I.R. 1953 S.C'. 4]. .-.---_._._s_.'q'.u. -...n.'.. '- . __ _;....u.'.u.-aa:*_...,_,,,__ ,4... -------------»«ui-ﬂn-nrI- 59 - u - )5: ' ' ' - ' f 8.15. lt may also he noted that the expression other. in this section does not mean _1'}(l;Ei:;§§n0 the oﬁice of a court} Section 10- 8 .16. \-"t'.; prt'.-pose, in extc-ml .<et:t.ion 10 to statutory instruments. It has been pointed '° in a Full liettcit tlteci:-.itttt of the Alialtubatl High ('otIrt'~' that section 4 . limitation Act. £1ll(ljin_qt]-uménm S. 10 , General Clauses Act. give expression to the general. principles of law enunciated by the ""-'°°'""'°""°d- masims "lat non cotrir ad r'mpo.t.rihilin"--the law does not compel a man to do that. which he cannot possibly pct'i"orm.---and "ucrtr.s' cm'.r'oe rmririnem g!'£?i»'(ll)I'l"'--fll7I act of the cottt't shall prejudice no man. ""I'hcsc sections do not in any way extend the period of limitation. H01' do they furnish any data For computation of time: they merely embody a rule of eit-?m€n.(tn'_1' in.9rt'cr= that if the time allowed by statute to do an act or to take. a proceeding expires on a day when the court is closed, it may be done on the next sitting of the court." In a number of other crises." it has been pointed out that section 4 , Limitation .r--'tt:t, and section It}, General Clatiscs Act embody the general principles enshrined in the two maxirns "'i'ex non crogir (rd intpossibilia and Acms en:-iae nmzuirmn grnt'nIbr'I." Fven if section 4 . Limita- tion Act is not applicable as contended by the appellant, the respondents can invoke section 10 oi'. the General Clauses Act . If neither of the provisions can assist the respondents, the_t' can still int-'olte the pattern! prEttt'ipics' embodied in the two provisions." 8.164%. In a Supreme Court case," section ill was applied to sttttttt-or)' 1'Lllt'_'S. Section 31(1) of the Representation oi the People Act, 1951 , enacts that the election petition may be presented 'wiriritr site}: time at may he pre.i'cribed."' Rule 119 of the rules under the Act provided a time limit. but used the words "rim later their 14 n'rt_r.t'."' The Court observed---- "It is obvious that the rule-mal-ting authority could not have intended to go further than what the section itself had enacted, and if the language of the rule is construed in conjunction with and under the coverage of the section under which it is framed. the words "not later than fourteen days", must he held to mean the saute thing as 'within rt period of fourteen days'. We entertain no doubt that the Lcgislattirc used both the expressions as meaning the same thing, and there are, accordingly, no grounds for holding that section 10 is not applicable to petitions falling within rule 119." Later, the Court described section 10 as "a beneﬁeient enactment." 8.17. We also propose to substitute the word "speciﬁed" for the word "prescribed" in section 10 , since the word "'pt'escrihed"' will now have :1 special meaning."' 8.18. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 10 should be Recommendation revised as follows :-- 35 '° 5°°"°" "1 Revised section 10 10(1) . Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, or by r.-try starumr_v insrrttrrtent made under any such Central Act or Regulation, any act or proceeding is directed or allowed to be done or taken in any Court. or oﬂicc on a certain day or within a speciﬁed period, then, if the Court or oﬂice is closed on that day or on the last day of the speciﬁed period. the act or proceeding shall be considered as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken in the next day afterwards on which the Court or office is open. . .l..rrr'h.t'}1m:'e,t'n.I' Prrrscrd V. G."J'ir2'lrr1.I'r' Inf, .-5i.l.R. i939 PI-1!. 667 {F.B.l. . Rain Prmdc V. .§'l1ee_.urtg:'iH Pnrrrfe, .-'\.l.R. i942 All 423, t[F.B.) (per Dar J.). - 3ﬂ'"3f'l-'I-ill?" 'r'- 7'f't??ﬂ' U9") 7 Nag. LR. H6; 12 l.C. 810; and Dl'm'rrri.t'r'nt,r.fi \-'. Ke.t'}ropra.t-ad, ;\_],R_ 1923 Nag-_ 245, I'€z"crt"et| to in Ruml}r'r it Pi'at/Jlznknl', .i\.l.R. l955 Nag. 300, 301. -4. 1Ian'nct'rr .':.'a'.+r,;tf1 \-'. .Ft'arirnil5t'ii,tyh. A.l.R. 1951'' 3.1:. Ill, 2?} [Venlcatarama Aiyer .I.J. 5. See section P---"prcserihed". 15 M ofLaw."7s1--9 :3}-._)_. Section 10A (new) Standard Time. Ijlefcrence to tune. Section 1I-- Distance and Rate. Section 12 . Section 13- - Gender and _ number. Merit of the provision. 60 I 'Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any act or proceeding to which the Limitation Act, 1963 , applies. (2) This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the fourteenth day of January, 1887 and to statutory instruments made under such Central Acts ur Regulations. 8.19. Section 10A is a new section which we propose to add.' It is a provision as to standard time, which would be a useful provision." The following section is recommended. Section lllai (New) IDA. Where in any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the . . . . . . . . . ... day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..197 ,3 any reference to it speciﬁed time of the day occurs, then such time shall, unless it is otherwise speciﬁcally stated, mean the Indian Standard Time." Distance and rates of duty 3.20. Section 11 is as follows :-- "l 1. In the measurement of any distance, for the purpose of any Central Act or Regu- lation made after the commencement of this Act, that distance shall, unless a diﬁerent intention appears, be measured in a straight line on a horizontal place." It needs no change. 8.21. Section 12 provides that duty shall be taken as pro rate in enactments. This section, which is based on section 4 of the General Clauses Act of 1868, is ultimately derived from an Act of 1849,' which contained a similar provision. It needs no change. Number and gender 8.23. Two rules of interest to gra.mmarians---both subject to the context-----are incorporated in section 13 . The first says that words imposting the masculine gender include females. The second provides that words in the singular include the plural, and vice versa. The object of both is to facilitate shortening of the language of enactments, by enabling the draftsman to avoid the tortuous process of mentioning the female of the species whenever he frames a pro- vision applicable to living beings, or of mentioning the plural whenever he uses a word in the . singular and vice versa. 8.24. The merit of these two provisions is obvious. Of course, the resultant brevity is purchased at a price, because, as is shown by the fairly large number of reported cases on the section, it is often not easy to decide whether, in a particular statutory provision, the context should be taken as indicating a contrary intention. Some of these cases have even gone to the Supreme Court." __H 1. Compare section 37' of the Australian Act- 2. Compare also section 3 of the Factories Act. 1943. 3. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be entered. 4. Central Act 5 ofl849. S. (a) The Regional Settlement Commissioner, (1963) 2 S.C.R. 534. biz Co. Ltd, Calcutta v. Its workmen (1962) Suppl. 3 S.C.R. 589. 601. 610. (b) The Management of Indian Ce. (c) Mir. Dhandnia Kedia ti': Can, v. The Commissioner oflncome-tax, A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 219, 13. (d) ,-'vewspapers Ltd. v. State Industrial Tribunal & Others , A.I.R. 1957 S.C. S32. S36. Jaipur and others v. Sunder Des Bhasi.-r, A.I.R. I963 S.C. nu; 61 And, there have been recent decisions' of the High Courts also. But this cannot be avoided. For this reason, no substantial change is suggested in the section. 8.25. In one of the cases before the Supreme Court,--Regional Settlement Commissioner Secnouts. V. Sunderda.s2--1'e1at1ng to rules made under the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rel:Ia- 3"" ""l°3' hilitation) Act (49 of 1954), section 13 (of the General Clauses Act ) was held not to apply to the particular rules, in View of the context. But the general question whether the General Clauses Act applied at all to subordinate legislation was not considered. 8.26. Certain verbal changes are, however, proposed in section 13 , which should be Verbal changes recornrnendedin revised as follows :----- . seCuon13_ Revised section 13 (1) in every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires. words Genderand importing the masculine gender shall include females. Number' (2) In every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires, words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singttiur. 1. Eg. (3.) A.l.R. 1964 Punj. 37, 89; U3) .-"L.I.R. 1970 Punj. Sl, E4. 2. Regional Settlement Commit-sinner, Jaipur V. Sunderdas Bhasin, A.I.R. 1963 S.C. IE1-(1963) 2 S.C.R. 534. incorporation. Section 13A tNew]--Effect of incorporationm Recommendation. Offences by companies. CHAI'"1'I:lR 9 CORPORATIONS 9.1. In this Chapter, we deal with certain matters relating to corporations. -9.2. Wlicncvcr an enactment has to incorporate a body of persons, it has to expressly provide, in a separate section, for many matters dealing with the effect of incorporation. Since enactments incorporating bodies are now increasing in number. it considered that a provision in the General Clauses Act on the subject would serve a useful purpose. A new provision as to the cltect of incorporation is. therefore, recommended as follows :--- Secfr7rJn 1 3A (New) "l3A. Where by or mider rrnr Central Act or Regrtlnrioir made on or after the . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .a'n_i' of. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .,1r:m_v nssociatirm or body of persons is constituted a barf)-' co-rporrttc. then, IUl'l€.S'.S' a differerit intention appears, that body (turp0rrrfe--«-- {_a) mail have perpetual succession, and a common seal with power to after or change the seal ,' (la) mrry sue and he rrred by its corporate name .' rc] shall have prm-'er------ ( i) to t:0rtfrrrr:.f by its corporate mime ; (ii) to acquire, hold or dispo.re of properrv, n'tzer}n=i' .|".'r?('H'-:'tlJt(" or immovable." 9.3. There is another matter relatiiig to corporations which may be considered. In Acts of Parliament containing penal provisions, there is often to be found a section relating to oﬂiences by companies. The section is usually in the following terms (slight variations are sometimes found). "Offences by co.--np:mies.' (1) if the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the oﬁence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to he proceeded against and pllnislictl accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub--section shall render any such person liable to any punishment it' he proves that the oﬂcnce was comrnittcd without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. (2) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, any director, ntanager, secretary or other officer of the company, not being a person in charge of and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the offence, shall, if it is proved that the oﬁence has been committed with his consent or connivance or that the coininission of the oﬁencc is attributable to any neglect on his part, also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to he proceeded against and punished accordingly. 1. Date of commencement ofamendinent Act to be inserted. 62 mnirnu-v-an-v-nu -'sih Mm- 63 Fltplrim-tra'oir.ml-"or the purpose of this scct.ion,---~ ta') "company"' ntczii-is any hotljtr corporate and includes a ﬁrm or other association of persons, and (b) "director", in relation to a ﬁrm means a partner in the ﬁrm." 9.4. We have considered the desirability of including such :1 section in the General Recommendation. Clauses Act , and have come to the conclusion that it would be proper to do so. We have made a similar recommendation in our Report' on 'Social and Economic Ofﬁences'. We recommend accordingly that the following section should be inserted in the Act :------ Secrloii l3AA {New} (1) lf the person committing an offence under any Central Act or Regulation made on g[[¢,,,_~¢., by or alter the ................... ..da_~,' of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .." is a company. then, unless '=°mF3"i=5- a different intention appears, the company as well as ever}-' person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the olfencc shall be deemed to be guilty of the otfence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the olfence was committed without his know- ledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. [2] Where an offence under any such Act or Regulation has been committed by a company, then, unless a different intention appears, any director, manager, secretary or other oﬁicer of the company, not being a person in charge of and responsible to the company for the conduct of its business at the time of the commission of the ofience, shall if it is proved that the olfence has been committed with his consent or connivance or that the commission of the otfencc is attributable to any neglect on his part, also be deemed to be guilty of that oﬁence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. ExpInnation.--For the purpose of this section,----- (a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a ﬁrm or other association of persons, and (b) "director", in relation to a ﬁrm, means a partner in the ﬁrm. 1. 47th Report. 2. Date of comzncitceineiit of amending Act to be inserted. Introductory. Statutes in derogation of sovereignty. Effect of growth of democracy. Distinction bet- ween Governmen- tal and other functions. CHAPTER 10 PROVISIONS COI\'CERNL\lG THE GOVERNMENT L0,]. We now proceed to consider certain topics relating to the position of the Government. 10.2. One of the most interesting problems which have arisen in Constitutional Law concerns the effect of statutes in derogation of sovereignty. How far does a statute bind the Government? For some time, a view prevailed that the sovereign remains unaffected by the general words or language of a statute.' The rule had, perhaps, its origin in the English Common law immunity of the Crown ; this immunity had first attached to the personal character of the King as the sovereign, and later extended to other sources of the law~rnaking and law enforcing power? The conflicting theories of sovereignty affecting this problem need not detain us. Wliat needs to be not.ed is that the doctrine that the state is not bound by statute except in certain cases is, speaking historically, associated with the institution of monarchy. realisation of the need to give 10.3. With the growth of democratic institutions and the activities, a movement adequate protection to the citizen even against governmental for giving more adequate and better deﬁned remedies against the State gained ground in various countries. The Crown Proceedings Act.194'!, in England, and in the United States of America, illustrate the growing trend to the Federal Tort Claims Act, illegal acts. Reference may also be made make the Government liable for various kinds of to the Law Co1nn1ission's Report3 on State liability in Tort. These developments are not to be viewed in isolation, but as a part of the process of the gradual erosion of the prerogative of the e.\tccutit-'e. Because of the growing number of welfare activities of the State, the matter has assumed great practical importance. State in regard to statutes, is a fact of the above As is often pointed out, the problem e State, is consistent with the need for The question of the position of the subject, and is one of steadily increasing importance. is one of at determining how far the prerogative of th full liability of the State, particularly because every day the State engages in activities com- parable with those of the citizens. The common law presumption, that the State is not bound by a statute except by express mention or by necessary implication, is no longer justiﬁable. It may be that this presumption is supported by the old positivist theory which regarded law as a command issued by superior to an inferior. If so, it is out of date now. 10.4. Sometimes, a distinction is sought to be made between functions which are "necessarily and inalienably"* governmental functions (on the one hand) and other functions, and it is empha- sised that in the case of the former, the special position of the State should continue. But our experience of the working of the similar distinction which was observed (for some time) with reference to governmental liability in tort, shows that such a distinction, even if theoratically justified, would not be workable, because it lacks precision. In fact, even in other countries, such distinctions have been criticised by the academic world? _ see para. 10.7. i'tif|"t1- . Borchard, "Government responsibility in Tort" U925} 35 Yale Law 1011111911 1. 17- lst Report of the Law Commission (Slaw liability in *0")- . See First Report of the Law Commission (State "F-l3'|mY in *0"): P339 37- (ar E.-,.3g1.m,_,1.., =-Lena: Status of Incorporated Public Authorities", (1943) 33 Allﬁlmliﬂn 1-3" JOUTWI 7» 123 ("hi Frieimsnn. "Shield ofthe Crown". (1950) 34 -"'1ll5t"3-H3" L9-"' J°1"'"a]- UI-t---uo;.;._- 64 , 65 10.5. in the United States, one of the weli--l<nown supporters of the doctrine of "irresponsi- biiity" of the State was Justice Holmes, who stated that there could he no legal "rigl1t" against the State, which itself made the law on which the right depended.' In one of his iettcrs to Laslciz Holmes stated that he could not understand how an instrumenlality established by-' the United States to carry out 5:5 will, should undertake to enforce something that is ag:n'n3i fis' will. "it seems to me like shaking on<:'s list at the sky, when the sky furnislies the energy that enables one to raise the ﬁat." 10.6. But, if this argument is accepted, and carried to its logical conclusion, the compr-::hen-- sivc and positive rule of law cannot survive. "If you just make one exception to the principle of legality, you cannot tell where it may lead you," The matter. therefore, requires a fresh look. 10.7. So much as regards the justiﬁcation for considering the subject. We may now discuss the present position. The rule in England is that in the absence of an express provision to the con- trary or of necessary intcndment to the contrary, the Crown is not bound by a statute. This rule prevailed in India also for a long time- But the Supreme Court of India has now held'-5 that this rule of the common law of England does not apply to India after it became a Republic. We think that this View of the Supreme Court should be codiﬁed." We would. moreover, htate that where there is no express provision, in the particular statute as to whether it binds the Government but reliance is placed on "necessary implication", the Court has to go through the entire Act, in order to determine. whether the Act is binding on the Government. Until the matter has h-een examined by a Court, no one can sag: with certainty whether an Act (which does not make an express provision on the subject) binds the Govcmme-nt. This position is obviously unsatisfactory. In the modern welfare State, the activities of Government have increased CCIIlSidE:'I'Elblj'. A member of the public dealing with the Government is, therefore, entitled to know, without going to a court of law, whether a particular Act binds the Government or not. Hence the only exception should be for cases where there is an express provision in a statute to the eﬁect that it does not bind the State. 10.8. We need not refer to all the cases of the High Courts. some are mentioned in the footnote." 'We, therefore, recommend that a section should be inserted in the General Clauses M to the eﬁcct that. in the absence of a contrary express provision, every Act of Parliament shaii be binding on the Governruont. Accordingly, we recommend the insertion of a new section as fol- lows : Secrion 133 {New} View of Holmes that there can be no enforceable right against the State. Rule of law auflicient answer to the argument. ]{u1e_ in England and in India. "I313. In the czbscrrce of or: express provision to the contrary, every Central Act or Reqiilarrmi Gcwmment to mode on or after the. . . .. . . .da_r of . . . . ..19'i' ,3 sulmll be binding on the government." 10.9. It may be interesting at this stage, to refer to the ancient Indian theory on this point. According to some scholars. support can he found in some ancient Indian texts for the theory . Kozuanann-i:aa 'V. Fo!yl5.lm:J'c_ (1987), 205 US. 349. 353. . Holmes Laski letters. (Howe Ed. 1953}, Vol. 2, page 322. . DLLguit_ as quoted in Schwarts, Introduction to American Administrative Law (1958). page 215. . Store of PF'-err Bangui 'V. Corp. of Calcutta, A.[.EL 1967 S.C- 997. . Union of India V. Jubb, .-1.1.11. 1968 SE. 360. . For High Court decisions sec para 10.1.4. nsﬁ-a. 1' {a} Ba-.r.-' Ami-1'}: Sirigﬁ -sr. Union aflndio, [1933-J 1'5 Punj. LE. 1 (F.B.). (b) M. V. Industries (P) Ltd. S". State ofKerai'a, (I971) K.L.R. 123. (cl Srare ofM_rsore v. ILG7. Ku1.irorrei'{l9Tl) 73 Born. LR. 1'23. A.I.R. l9'i'2 Born. 93. (d) Unilm offndia V. Sugrnii-or', A.E.R.. 1.969 Born. I3-. -(oi Coiieerar Scmrft Arm! V. Veaiinrhazcharfor, A.I.R. 1972 Mad. E48. 3. Due oic JTJ. nenccrneni of amendment Act to be entered. d\UI4=-.Lu:~..ii- be bound. Position_ in anoi- cnt India. Sec! ion I 3 -C (New)-- Priority debts due to the Government. Position as to taxcs--~Supremc Court judgment. Limitations indi- cated by Supreme Court. Debts other than taxes. Areas not forming part of British India. Relevance of doctrine that Crown is not bound. 66 that thc iﬂw, being of divine origin, bound the king and the subjects alikc.1 Howcwr, we do not propose, to express any opinion in this matter. because. before we do so, an examination of the problem involving iurthcr stiidy in depth will he i'cquiri;r.i, and we think that such exami- nation is not necessary for the purposes of this Report. 10-10. We have already dealt with one question concerning'-" the Cioycrnment. Another ques- tion relevant to the position of t.he Government concerns the priority of debts due t.o the Govern~ merit. In general, the Government has preference in respect of the payment of debts due to it. As early as 1363, in a judgment discussing the entire history of the Royal prerogative in this respect, the High Court of Bombay" laid down that a judgment debt due to the Crown is entitled to the sumo precedence in ei-Lecution as a judgment debt in England due to the Crown, provided there is no special legislative provision affecting that right in the particular case. But there are certain refinements and limitations as to this doctrine, which require to be considered. 10.11. So far as inconu-:--tux arrears are concerned, it has been held by the Supreme Court' that the Government of India is entitled to claim priority over debts due from the citizen to unsecur- ed creditors. The basic justification for the claim for such priority. according to the Supreme Court. rests on the well-recognised principle that the State is entitled to raise money by taxation, because, unless adequate revenue is received by the State, it would not be able to function as a sovereign Government at all. 10.12. Nevertheless, while laying down his principle, the Supreme Court5 was careful to indicate the possible limitations of the doctrine. Briefly, these limitations were : first, that the judgment (of the Supreme Court) was limited to arrears of income-tax; secondly, that the question whether the same common law doctrine applied to those parts of India which were previously comprised in the former Indian States may need separate consideration, and thirdly, that a parti- cular statute may affect the prerogative right of the State. 10.13. The question whether the priority applies to debts other than taxes has been the sub- ject--mattcr of some controversy" amongst the High Courts. The Bombay High Court has answered it in the afﬁrrnativci, while the Calcutta High Court has taken a different view.-" 10.14. It may be noted that there is no proot that the doctrine of priority of Crown debts was given judicial recognition in the territory of the Hyderabad State period to January 26,1950." 10.15. Another aspect of thc,mat.tcr which requires consideration is, whether the well-known decision of the Supreme Court,"-' holding that the common--]aw doctrine that the Crown is not bound by the statute is not the law in force in India, has any bearing on the operation of the doctrine of priority of Crown debts. The Bombay High Court" has held that there is no warrant for treating the two principles on the same footing. The High Court took the View that the doctrine that Crown is not bound by statute is archaic and undemocratic, while the principle of the priority of Crown debts is "based on equity and justice. and serves an important public purpose." 1. (an RN. Sen. Hindu Jurisprudence. page 31- 0:) Dr. S. K. Ayangar. Introduction to Dikshitar, Hindu Administrative Institutions. pages 32. 33. {c} NN. Law Studies in Ancient Indian Polity, page 135. . Para 10.1 to l0.9.supra. Secretary o_f.S'tai'e for Irrrﬁo V. Bmnbay Lmrdiﬂg Md 351'}-'JP1'"§ C0HIPfmJ". U 353) 5 T3-H-C-K 23- . Para 10.12, infra. Biiiiderr Supply Corporarioi-z V. Union of India, (1965 . Sec Um'o:1o_f'Ina'i'a v. Oﬂictiaf As.rz'gnee, (1970) 7'3 Born. _ Sec Ur-zian of India v. Oﬁiciat' .4rsi'gnee, (197-'0)?3 Born. Law Reporter 62 M'r.rr!I \'. A.'snonrm' & C'o., .-5..I.R. 1955 Cal. 433. C'm'!eetm', .4urar1gahm:f V. Ceirtml Bank, A.I.R. 1967 S-CL 1331 State of West Bengal V. Corporation ofcaicirrra, A.l.R. 1967' S.C. 997. Para 10.7, supra. Um'0n offndin V. Qiﬁciai .4.s.rr'griee, (1970) 73 Born. LR. 623-. ) 56 l.T.R. 91, 96 to 98 (S.C.). Law Reporter 623, 628, 632. 3, 628, 632. ._._ '."S'-"'§D9u~.ao~.-_..«.;st._.-N ___ ..« . ....._ ...._«,P _..__i__.__, ,___, _ _ '.-..':1_ __ . . ... _ ------r---ﬂu...___ _ i --as -u,. nu.---- - 67 -11 1 . . .4 ' r , 5 .. r . ' 1 i 3]')(1'\.'(: di:-_(_';1g.,§.'i4':_] 'J_-'|jt ':'.(|\_?s' '.l1'ti.i tl".9l'('. ].'.:- l']E'Cd i{i .sLlEii.. LhC lEi'|.'v OH lllf.' Sl.Il]]l3CL1%:eﬁVfr0r Scull": of the prEorit;. of the tﬁebts tin: to Gt'\":T[1]'_'tCtli. for FI;"i"CT[ti reasons. ---- (_i} ll}: }'}I;J2~Sll'.lt_' ii'.'i'*ii!-'l'._i-:')t'="-i on '-_he tloetrine-, referred to ever. in the judgment of the Supreme Courti; (iii the practical importance of one of the possible limitations. namel}-'. the opera- tion of the ( ocirine in relation to debts other than taxes ; tiiii the C'I.1l'ﬁlCL of decisions between the Bombay arcl Calctitta High Court on the last--ment.ioncd point=; (iv) the tgticstion of ciicct of the Supreme Court jutlgtrtctlt relating to the binding eﬁect of statutes: on the Governnicnt on the doctrine of pL'1O1'1l_'§."3L and (V) thc miccrtaizt position as to how far the doctrine of priority of debts due to the Government is applicable to territories not formerly comprised in British India'. 10-1?. Bci" ore a conclusion can he reached as to the proper rule to be enacted in this respect. it is essential to go into the possilj-le justiﬁcations for the rule of priority. The first general jnstiﬁeatioti is that the State should be able to discharge its primary govern- mental functions, and funds are needed for this purpose. As the Supreme Court has observed' :»- "it is cssei-1:i:.=l that as a f-Sovereign, the State should he aisle to discharge its primary governmental functions and in order to be able to discharge such functions efficiently, it must be in possession of necessary funds, and this consideration emphasises the necessity and the v.=istlon:= of conceding to the State the right to claim priority in respect of its tax 31 dues . In at Bombay case," it was observed. ".F.vcn in a democracy and even under socialism the State must have [.'L'l'[.F!,l'J rights ttz:~;l privi eges. The State has to govern. the -State has to ﬁnd money to he used for st:-r.;ia€ist.ie principles and Courts have always given every facility to the State to realise moire;-' u-hie!'-. are not collected for any private purpose but are intended for the public cofier and which are ultimately intended for the public need. This principle. which has been accepted by our Courts, is not a principle which is peculiar to British jurisprudence". Possible instill- cation for the rule of priority Considercd----Di.s-- charge of gov- crnmental [unc- tions. 10.13. Tito 3-CCt2I'i{l jnstiﬁcaiion for the rule of priority is the doctrine that where the title of Ff'l1'3'"°""'°3' °f the King and the titic of a subject concur. the King's title must be preferred. The folio"--'i_ng statement. to he found in Col:e"s Commentary on Litigation, which was quoted in a Bornhaj, cast:.7 niziy he referred to in this context zrw " . . . . ..'l'sis: i=7_ing_ ltis pI'Crt3gtili'v'C. regularly is to he preicrretl, in payment of his duty or tlcizi, hctore any subject. at-Jiough the Kings debt or duty he the latter; and the reason hereof is: for that the st4.'.«.-rm." r'i'gis es.' }'undame.n.ttmt belli er' ﬁrtn:n;:e:ztt.nrt pttcilt." I. Bn_1ln'3r.-I St'_.'?,|'J£'_l' {.'n.",rJ;:-mr."iJr: v. L-'error: of Iilsfia. (19651 55 I.T.R. 9l, 96 to 98, Para l0.l.'-3, .strpr.:z. 2.'. P€tI'i1 ill? 'Iii ltll I3, supra. 3. P174 H. I5. \LI'_.'?"i!- -1-. Para ll}. ll, art-_': ll}. 14, .\'.'J'_i'.?l'."l'. 5. Bxiln":-_r .5':-up!-' t'."J.='.t:nrn'_-"Dir '.-'. t:'.'1t'rm r:_.I")'r1:.haI, ([965) 56 I.T.R. 91. I03 lS.C.). Fr. BJ'1--'t' .2-,1' fsr ,'.'.-r t.-'. 8'>:<.- H' H, -T195 2] 57-' 3 :11. LR. 3='1_5, 364 (Chagla C..l.). '.". 3rF."}'{'.'!r.H"_1.'.'.j!'-.5'!(I:'F B ;.=.1.-.'>.-z\.' L-..r.ru';':rg.1.*ad5fif;Jp.!'irg C7,. (1 353} 3 B. H C R, '13 . 13, 15 M of [-awf74--lCI Ieofthe Stall. Public welfare. Priority jttstiﬁed at present day only for taxes. Recommendation. 63 Coke pointed out this right is based upon the Latin niaxim Quttmrfo jttr t.'(Jmi'nf regi.r er Subditf C"Of'lCtt!'."ef'l2', ms regtlir preferferﬂ deﬁcit. (Where the title of the Kine ':[T'l(.l the title of :t subject concur, the Kings title must be preferred). 10.19. The third justiﬁcation for priority of Governnienfs debts is the aspect of public welfare. A full Bench of the Madras High Court1 has pointed out that the rule is based upon an important doctrine of public welfare. "This rule may he said to be the outcome of the maxim solos popm't' suprentn fax {regard for the public welfare is the highest, law). It is but natural that a debt at large, should be preferred to the debt of rt single creditor." 1020. As against these possible justiﬁcations, it must be remembered that every,' rule of priority created inequality and in a democratic country, provisions creating inequality can be per- mitted onty within reasonable and justitlable limits. Having regard to these considerations, it appears to us that the principle of priority can, in modern times, be justified only to the extent to which it can be said to serve a public purpose." Such a public purpose can be predicated in respect of taxes and fees due to the State. So far as taxes and fees are concerned, it is ttndeniable that the principle is tteccssary for the working of the governmental inachincrgr. For that reason, the claims of the iansecurctl creditors have to yield to those of the State. At the same time, there is :1 basis for treatir~g debts other than taxes and fees on a footing different from taxes. It is an accident that the particular debt accrues to the State. The general rule that none should have special privileges should be allowed to operate in the case of such debts. 10-21. Accordingly-', we recommend the insertion of the following Section. Section 1343 (New) "I3C. In the n.b..venc'e of an express prow'.rt'on to the contrary, a debt due to the Government under any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the . . . . . . ..doy of. . . .197 . . . . . . .." shall have priority over other debts not secured by or mortgage or charge, if the debt is in the nature tag" .'_.' mix or fee, t.».'.r.t not o='herivi.s'€.". T1-r'ru'r,1' Bank Ltd-, (I962) 44 I.T.R. 189, [95 {Mad} (F.13.fI. l. C".-.:Nr=.:-tor of T:'rr1c}1i'mpo.NrT V. 2. (T. para l0.l9, .5'!J]J?'ﬂ. '_ 1]-;i_-_ of cointnencczitent of amending Act to be B11t€1'¢d- -4 t t «rt. -t{ CHAPTER 1 I POWERS AND FUNCTIONARIES _ ' 1 11.1. 1-'rot'i.~;ions tts to powers and functionaries are contained in sections 14 to 19 of the tmmductory. Act, and we deal with theri in this Chapter. 11.2. Section 14 provides tltat where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the com-- Stlactioin 14:--Alp-mi . . . . -- 163. 011. D S rnencemcnt of this Act, any power is conferred, then, unless a different trttetttton appears. that 3),? instrument, power may be exercised from time to time as occasion arises. I'eB0mﬂ_I~'-'I1<1~=d- The section does not mention statutory instruments, but it has been hcldi to apply to them.' We think that it will be useful to codify this interpretation, by including statutory instrurnents expressly in section 14 , and we recommend its extension accordingly. 11.3. There is another point concerning section 14 . While the section provides that powers §f°;'"'-'"§"g:E°" conferred bv statute are exercisable from time to time (unless a ditlercnt intention appears from tion 14 to duties; the context), it is obvious that the position regarding dtm'es'imposcd by statute should not be dis- similar. Accordingly. we recommend that the section should be extended to duties also and revised as fo1lt;tws.. Revised .tectt'rm 14 14. (1) Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act or by any statutory instrument made thereunder, any power is conferred or any duty imposed, then unless a difterent intention appears, that power may be exercised, and that n-'ttt3.: shall be performed, from time to time as occasion requires. (2) This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the four- teenth day of Jttnuary, 1887, cmrt to 5I:??tt'!0r_1' instrunicms maria sltercurtder. 11.4. Section 15 provides that where, by any Central Act, or Regulation. 3 power to appoint Section 15_--I-:e-_ any person to ﬁll 3.2119 ofiiec or execute any function is conferred, then. unless it is otherwise expressly protided, any such appointment (if it is made after the eornrnencement of this Act) tr:-ry instruments.' may "be made either by name, or by virtue of oﬁice. Some of the more recent decisions" on the ,socﬁon have brought out a few aspects of the application of the section. We propose to extend this section also to statutory.-' instrurrtents. The section should be revised as under ----- Rewlted section 15 .; 15- Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, or b__t= any .stat.r:tor_t.' ins.'t-trttzem tmzde !he.re"-- under, a power to appoint any person to fill any oﬂice or execute any function is conlt-1'rerl, then, unless it is otherwise r;pressly provided, any such appointment, if it is made after the commence- ment of this Act, may be made either by name or by virtue of oﬂice. 1. Sftrm.-tr:ghat2t' 2'"i'trr:.s,'mt'r V. Kttrrju CJ'2e.rzt'-er, A.l.R. I971 Mad. 3?, 39. para. 4 (Alagiriswami 1.). 2. State ofU.P. \'. Babttratrt, A.l.R. 1951 5.4:. 751, 761, reled 0:1. 3. {a} Aiirfrrl Hr.r.s'.I.'nr't: '\-'. Stare offfujurar, A.[.R. I968 S.C. 432 ; tb] PJ'. V. Sh."t' RamJ'Jr'mdray, A.l.R. 1960 A.P. 282. { C} P.P. v. Jﬂtitfk 5I ':et'i'_.f.l', A.I.R. 1965 A.P. 37;'. id] Jr-'_l'-"I.'t!r'-"rt! V. Utrfon rrffttdfu, A.l.R. I970 Guj. H33, H7. (E) State tn Safer, A.l.R. l9?0 Tripura J. 69 Station 16. Section 131(1) Suction 18. Section 18- Recommenda- tion. ?O 11.5. Section 16 provides that power to appoint includes power to suspend or di_smisg,, I1 needs no change. 11.6, Section 17(1) reads as follows "I7. (1) In any Central Act or Regulation made after the comineucemeni of this Act, it" shall be sufficient, for the purposes of indicating the application of a law to every person or number of persons for the time being executing the functions of an office, to mention the oﬁieial title of the oﬂicer or present executing the functions, or that of the ofﬁoer by whorl] the functions are commonly exeCutcti.'". ~ The words "at present" are not very happy. We, therefore, propose a small verbal change and recommend that section 17(1) should be revised as follows :-- ' Rewiied section 17(1) "l7. (1) In any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act, it shall be stlflieient, for the purpose of indicating the application of a law to ever}: person or number of persons for the time being executing the functions of an office, to mention the oﬂtciitl title of the otlicer executing the functions, at the time when the Central Act or Regulation is madh. or that of the oﬂicer, by whom the functions are commonly executed". ' 11.7. Section 18 deals with the powers of a successor to an otiics-._-_ It needs no change. 11.8. The Act is silent as to the exercise of powers by delegates. We think it desirable to make it clear that where a power is delegated and the exercise of the power is dependent on the opinion of the authority on whom the power is conferred, the opinion to be formed ( as a condition precedent} will be that of the delegate. We recommend the insertion of a new section for the above purpose on the following lines:-- Section ISA (new) ISA. Where, under any Central Act or Regutnrioi-r n-rode on or after the ........ ........ day of ..l, or under any statutory instrument made there- under, ---- -" ( a) the exercise of a power or discharge of a function by a person or authority is dope!- dent upon the opinion, belief or state of mind of tl-..'1t person or authority in relaticm to any matter, and (b) that power or function has been delegated in pursuance. of such Act or Regulation or statutory instrument, then, save as is otherwise expressly provided by such Act or Regulation or statutory instrurncnt, the power or function may be exercised or dis- charged by the delegate upon the opinion, belief or state of mind of the delegate in relation to that matter. » It may be noted that a similar point arose in Hazra! Syed Shah 1:. Coinmzbrsioner of' Wakfoﬁ where the Supreme Court approved the observations made by Lord Benning in Mmzg-9m".r cast' and stated that where powers and duties were inter-connected and it was not possible to separate one from the other in such a way that powers might be delegated while duties were retained and ' vice verse, the delegation of powers took with it the duties. I. Date of Amendment Act to be entered. 2. Horror Syed Shah. v. C'or1tnih:rio:Jt:r 0f W0-iifar. A-I-Pu 195343-C 1036- 3. ,Edward Mlnrgoni \-. A.G. of .'\"a.I':1rerrr Rhorferio (1960) A.C. 336; (1960) I All E.R. 446 (1-I.L.}. , ..V_..._.....--_--...---._._...........V.... .. .7, ?I ' ~ 11.9. Section 19 deals with the pow;:1's of oiiicial chiefs and subordinates. it needs no change. Section 19 . 11.10. Wiien matters of form prescrit-:d by a statute are departed from. nice questions as 5¢"--;"°"_19A to the effect of such departure arise. In general, courts take a common sense view. and disregard Deviation [mm minor deviations not affecting the substance. it is tints that Statutorji' recognition is given to what g';1:g3n;En da_ the courts do in praeti-2e, by r. suitable provision in the General Ciauses Act. The procedural iion_ Codes alrcarly contain provisior-.5 achieving the same resultl. A new provision'-' as the eﬁect of deviation from form is, tlierefore," 1'E.'CO£11!11€l'lCl€Cl as follows'*:-- .Seci'r'on 19.4 (I. ew) "19A. I'l"'lIt*H('l'E." o form is pr'e5cr."bed for or .rpecz'_ﬁed for ring,' not by rzirv Central Act' or Regulation, or by rim.' s:rm.r.-'or;.-' iI1'.i'f?'IH?'3(.'iI." nmde t'he;'r?tt.r.~'der, Meir, sm-'e as r's_orIzerw.ise expressly provided by such Cfilliﬂl Act' or Rr'grrltin'r2ir or l1_1_' Fucfi .s':'ri.'iHrJr_'.' frirlrmnem, any (lei.-'r'm'i'0m' titans'- from neither a,ff.ec'ifng the .mb.Y!rim'e nor L.'ﬂlCtIlﬂ?€£l In rnisleari, shall not render the act or form iiivalidﬂ'. 11.11. We considered the question of inserting a provision ancillary powers, on the Ancillary following lines :----- powers' "Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, made after the . _ . _ . . . . . . . . . ..da;v' of power is conferred on it! person, oﬁiccr of functionary to do or enforce the doing of any act or 'tliing. ail E-Llilj powers shall be deemed to be also conferred as are neces- sary to enable the pcr:-zen, oﬁicer or functionary to do or enf-i:'ee the doing of the act or thing." We have, after careful consideration, come to the conclusion that it is not unlikely that such , a provision may be abused, and so we are against its insertion. I. (8.) Sections 533 to 537, Code of Criminal Proezclure. 1398: (b) Section 99. Code of Civil Procedure . 1908. 2. Cﬁ Russel, Legislative Drafting and Forms, (1933), page 585, Model Interpretation Act. Clause 29. 3. Compare section 19(g), Uniform Interpretation Act, (1956), page 26!). 4. See also section 30 ofthe Tran-encore-Codiin Genera] Clauses Act, 1125 (T of 1125). _ 5. New section I91; can apply to existing Acts also. H. l..__ i u l P I CHAPTER 12 STATUTORY 1N S'l'RUMEN'l'S Irtt.-'odtrctor_v Introductory. l2.l- Sections 2 '11 to 24 of the Act contain prmisions as to statutory instruments {subordi- nate legislation). V3503 1965- 12.2. Various questions have occupied the attention ot academic writers and of the judiciary . §1ﬁ_f".ﬁC:':{'§mi"g in regard to delegated legislation. Of these questions, the following are relevant with reference to legislation. the General Clauses Act :-- -3 (:1) Various forms of .5'Iafu_!or_v instruments and questions of nomenc'iature--- (i) rules' of general application; (ii) orders, (usually issued by the Government o-n particular matters) ; {iii} by-laws (usually applicable to limited local areas) ; I (iv) schemes {usually containing elaborated provisions) ; (v) forms; (vi) notiﬁcations. A convenient name covering all these. would he obviously desirable. and we are sug- gesting the expression "statutory instrument". (b) Procedure for ntakingisttbordintzte legislation - ii) Antecedeut publicity ; (ii) Consultation ; (iii) Subsequent publication. (C) Control of Parliament over statutory £nstruments------ Laying before Parliament". (cl) Construction of statutory instrunze.-m-- (i) Construction'; (ii) Power to issue rules etc. to include power to add etc-.5; (iii) Construction of provision in the parent Act for publication"; {e} Inter-relationship between the parent Act and the statutory z'nstrument---- ti) Making of rules etc. between passing and commenceiueiit' of the parent Act : (ii) Continuation of orders etc. under a repealed lawa. ' we are mentioning these topics here. to show the importance of the subiect. L A.L.J.R. 300. See recommendation relating to the expression "Statutory instrument" in Chapter 3. . No provision at present. . Section 20 . Section 2 |. Section 23 . . Section 22 . . Section 24 . =°-4:=~.v-4=-L-=2» 72 Rules generally-to carry out the purposes are dealt with in Uta}: Cons'trrtcIt'ott. 39 A.L. JR. and in Jacob --. ' _ H'... . - _.._...-.-jg-....,,.,_.._,, _ _ .,,_.._..,...-... - -- -u.w------- - .. .. ., ..--.t- i .. ...----u.._...-.- ----- - w x - 73 Law not .wmrdnrn':'.rerl or NJ snjegunrnk 12-3. The law relating to subordinate legislation in India has not yet been standardised in Law remix all its aspects. A cursory survey of the various Central Acts conferring power to make rules, l':g1.;';':i':'n"5% regulations etc. reveals that until recently, the Legislature did not follow any particular pattern, standardised. with reference to various matters concerning subordinate legislation. This itself indicates the desirability of having standard and uniform safeguards. ~ 12.4. It may also be noted that during recent times the discussion has centred more round safeguards in regard to delegation than round the standards laid down by the legislature while 0 'snub' delegating its powers. It was observed by the distinguished American Writer' Davis, in 1953 :-- "The protection of advance legislative guidance is of little or no consequence as compared with the protection that can and should he provided through adequate procedural safeguards, appropriate legislative supervision or re-examination, and the accustomed scope of judicial review." With this. we may compare the following comment made by the same writer in'--' 1965 :--- "The impact of the Treatise has been rather substantial in its recommendation to state courts that the test of validity of delegation ought to have more to do with safeguards than with standards. The cases reviewed in this Supplement show that the standards test is on the way out, and the safeguards test is in the aocendancy." 12.5. Having regard to what is stated above, it appears desirable that the General Clauses Need to Act should contain certain safeguards in respect of subordinate legislation. Different safeguard! safeguard'. are provided in different Central. Acts. It would therefore, be advisable to standardise some of tlwcinrlispensable safeguards, and to incorporate them in the General Clauses Act . This will not Olly: to uniformity, but will also shorten the language of individual Acts, and save cases of any inadvertent omission of the draftsrnan to provide such safeguards in a particular Act. Where it is felt that such safeguards are not necessary, an express exemption can be given in the Act. Two important .rnfegr.=:zrds in respect of subordinate legirlation _ 12.6. The two safeguards that appear to be essential in respect of subordinate legislation ;[;';':gulm"°""'Il are :---~ ' . (a) publication of statutory instruments", and I T (b) legislative scrutiny of statutory instruments'. 'lih_€ ﬁrst refers to the immediate stage. The second relates to a later stage. We shall now prone to deal with these safeguards. Publication. and commencement l2.":'. First, as regards publication of statutory instruments", some of the Acts conferring I safagumﬁ at pow'er§to make rules are silent with regard to publication". The rest of the Acts do require some publication. -: sort of publication- !\ large majority of them require publication in the Official Gazette.» Here i , .,f'jj again,-no uniform formula is adopted. ln some Acts, all that is stated is that the rules shall be. 1. Davis, Admntistrativc r.atﬁ};adg}.-, (lass), Vollul, page 93. _ 2. Davis. Adrninistrative Law Treatise, (1955) pocket Part, page 55, para. 2. ll, cited in Jaffe and Nathanson Administrative Law. Cases and Materials (1968). page 93. ' 3. Para 12.7 er .-.-eq. Erzfra. 4. Para 12.19, et seq. infra. 5. Para l2.ﬁ, sr.r,I:Ira. 6. Eng. ta) Section 18(1) . Census Act, 1948 (37 of 1948}. lb) Section 13(3) . Central Sales Tax Act , I956 (74 oF1956), Position in England as to publicaticnl. Position in Australia to publication. IS 11 Position is i - New Ziealiind as to ptthlicaion. 74- published in the Otﬁcial Gazette} In some other Acts, rules are required to be made by notiﬁca- tion in the Ctfﬁcial Gazette." There is another category under which rules are not to have effect until they are published in the Oﬁicial Gazette." -There is yet another variation of the formula, which provides that. the rules shall be publishdii in the Official Gavctte and shall thereupon have effect 'as if cnacted in'the Act'. [e..g., see section 59(5) , Mines Act f of 1952)]. It is. thus, clear that the present law relating t.o-publication:-I9f"~ subordinate legislation is unsatisiactory. it will be instructive in this co-nnecion to consider the position in some Conitnonwcalth countries and in. the U.S.A. 12.8. In England, before 1893; subordinate legislation was required to be published in the London Gazette; and if as Carr had observed] was 'buried rather than revealed}, in the volumi- nous miscellaneous contents of the Gazette. The Rules Publication Act, 1893, provided for publi~ cation of statutory rules by the {)ueen's Printer. Under this Act, the rules and orders, with some exceptions, were to be sent to the Queen's Printer and to be numbered by him and, subject to regulations, printed and put on sale. 'lt is true that not all rules and regulations were printed, but every instrument which was oliicially numbered was mentioned in a classiﬁed list at the end of the annual volume of the Statutory Instruments printed by the Queen's Printer. The Corn- mittee on Ministers' Powers, while reviewing the working of the 1893 Act, recommended that the publication should be made a condition precedent for the coming into force of all itlstrumcltlts except those that have been published in draft under the pre-publication rules andsubsequeatly issued injsubstantially the same form as in the draft. In such cases the Committee recommended that the public notiﬁcation of the enforcement would be sutﬁcient Nothing came out of these recommendations till the end of the second world war. In 1946, and Act was passed, called the Statutory Instruments Act, which repealed and replaced the 1893 Act. This Act repeated the provisions of section 3 of the 1893 Act as to publication, and provided" further that "it shall be a defence to prove that the instrument had not been issued by his Majesty's Stationery Oﬁce at than date "of the alleged contravention. . . . . . ." A serious drawback of the English system is ﬂit. publication is not made a condition precedent to the operation of the statutory instruments." 12.9. In Australia, section 5 of the Rules Publication Act, 1903-1939, provided that an insub- ment of subordinate legislation should be numbered, printed and made available for sale by the Government Printer. The same section also provided for publication, in the Australian Gazette of a notice that a rule has been made and that copies. thereof would be available for purchase at speciﬁed places. It may be noted in this connection,' that the provisions of section 5 of {';Australian) Rules Publication Act, 1903-1939, have to be read with section 48 of the Acts interpretation Act, 1901-1966, which makes a general provision for" compulsory notiﬁcation the making of all regulations. Thus, in Australia publication of delegated legislation is compulsory, unless there is a speciﬁc exemption in any Particular Act. In fact, publication is not only compulsory, but also a condition precedent for the coming into force of subordinate legislation. Until 1937, no regulation could take effect unless it had been published but in 193? some exceptions based on administrative convenience, and, broadly speaking, not involving the rights of individual citizens, were provided for under this rule." The Australiﬁn for obvious reasons. won universal acclaim. in the Gazette of system has, 12.10. In New Zcaland, until as late as 1936, there was no provision requiring the sepai[_ﬁo- publication of delegate-.1 legislation. Whenever provision was made for publication of mgtilufpga made under a particular enactment, they were published generally in the New Zealand Gsnqp, . See section 33, Central Excises etc. Act, 1944 (l of194-4). .See section 41 , Warehousing Corporations Act, 1962 (58 of 1962]. _ Section 36(1), Cantonrnents (House Accommodation) Act, 1923 (6 of 1923}. Carr : Concerning English Administrative Law, (1941), page 57. . Section 3-Statutory Instruments Act 1946 {E11Eli5h) , Kerscll : Parliamentary Supervision of Delegated Legislation, (1960), page S. Kersell: Parliamentary Supervision of Delegated Legislation. (1950). Page 9- . Benjaﬁeld and Whitmore. Australian Administration Law (19713. nagt 105- oa3..i_a~u.:i:.-...ai{_i_.i i _ "--IV--?ﬁ' .._____..._._.,,-._..____. -- ------------.:---p----.----.n.. -....y. e 2 .8. 75 and in a manner not very much different from that which obtained in England prior to 1893._ For the first time in 1936, an enactment of a limited character was passed, dealing with publication of subordinate legislation. Section 3 of the Regulations Act, 1936, provided that all regulations, except those exempted by the Attorney--General, should be published. -- Position in Canada, as to publication 12.11. In Canada, until the passing of the Regulations Act, 1947, there was no legislative ~p.rcn-Iisiort requiring systematic publication of delegated legislation. It was only after the furore which the notorious Ottawa Espionage Investigation of 1946 created, that the question of syste~ rnatic publication of rules came to he Considered seriously. A Royal Conirnissimi was appointed to gorinto the matter, and ultimately the Statutory Orders and Regulations Order, 1947, was passed- Most of the provisions of this Urdcr were enacted in the Regulations Act of 19-137. This Act appiies oniy to instruments made in the exercise of the legislative power or to regulations for the contra- vcnlhn of which a penalty of ﬁne or imprisonment is prescribed by or under an Act of Parliament. Certain exceptions are made even to this rule, but generally speaking, the Act covers all instru- ments likely to prejudice the rights of individuals and personal freedom. The Act provides for a system of revision, recording, numbering and publication of the various regulations. It is not to go into details of the Act. A signiﬁcant provision of the Act' is to the effect that no person shall -be convicted for an oﬁence consisting of in contravention of any regulation that was notpublished in the Gazette of Canada except where the regulation was one which was exempted the operation of the rule as to publication or where it is proved that on the date of the contravention reasonable steps had been taken for the purpose of bringing the purport of regulation to the notice of the public or the person charged. This provision is similar to l'.]_:a.£,1:rnbodied in section 3 of the (English) Statutory Instruments Act" of 1946. Thus, in Canada, In. .' England. publication is not a condition precedent to the coming into force of subordinate tion, but non-publication, is a defence. 12.12. In the United States of America, Congress enacted, in 1935, the Federal Register Pogiﬁo3inU_S_A_ Act.,'. which was an aftermath of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Panama Reﬁning Co. v. é?u']° P"b]5'"' _ Bynrj.'-'5 It provides for a system of publication of all Federal Regulations, Rules and Orders of ' ; tjoietal application, and for their legal eﬁect. Under the Act , all Federal subordinate legislation 9 shouldbe published in an official publication called the Federal Register. This Act anticipated the and the Canadian Acts, on the subject of publication and speciﬁcally provided that I ."djIcumen ", i.e. Rules and Regulations and Orders required to be published under the Act "shall not be valid as against any person who has not had actual knowledge thereof" until it had been -ﬁled for publication." ' ' 11.13. Taking all the circumstances into consideration, we are of the view that the safe-guard Dean-ahilltyor _ ﬂing publication is required; though, in our view, it should apply to statutory rules and 1°"l"'°"ﬁ°"- its and general orders of the Government only, and should not extend to other forms of suboddinate legislation. Rules and bye-laws and general orders are the most common form of inllsoﬂdicnate legislation which aﬁect citizens in the same way as an Act of Parliament.. This is. hololeaver, not true of other forms of subordinate legislation, such as, orders, which are inconse- quential from the point of view of the public, and relate to individuals only. A general extension of the safeguard of publication to all forms of subordinate legislation is not, therefore, necessary it E , in certain cases, even give rise to practical difficulties. We have no doubt that where any subordinate legislation other than rules or bye-laws or general orders affects -the public, the enactment which permits the making of such ilogislation will make special provision for its pdblication in the most suitable manner. ......'.."..'.......'-u . ~.. -_.. 49 .'l .d' .. n on ' 1. Section 6 .3 (Canada) Regulations Act, 1947., 2. Para 12.8, supra. 3. The Federal Register Act, 1935. -I. Panarna Reﬁning Co. v. Ryan. (1935) 293 US. 338. 5. See, now, the Administrative Procedure Act, (1955) 5 U§.E1. s_eeti_onI 552 and 553. L Newman, "Government and Ignorance" ([950) 63 Harv. L. Rev. 929. .. 15 M {at I..awf14--11 _ __ E = _wVWf Hr _ . ; $:,'..:é ;' E. Importance cf proper publica- : UDII. Importance stres- sed by the Sun- reme Court. Reeomntendhtion as to publica- tion. , Amendtnent will ﬁll up pp lathe .' .' I law. Copies of sub- ordinate legisla- tion to be Blade available. ' 7.5 12.14. As observed by Kersell} "if a legislature realistically expects such legislation made under its authority to be eﬁective and also controllable, it must make minimal provisions for publicity and for 'laying' so that it may know what has been done under the powers delegated to it." The importance of proper publication of subordinate legislation cannot, therefore, be over--- emphasised. If, as is well recognised, subordinate legislation has the full effect of law, it is elementary justice "that those who are sought to be affected by it should become aware of existence. As Carr, in his evidence before the Committee on the Minister's Powers forcefully," "it would be undesirable if it could be said that obscure Clerks in Whitehall forth streams of departmental legislation which nobody had any means of knowing. This he the method attributed to Calligula of writing his laws in very small characters and-hangiiﬁ them up on high pillars the more effectively to ensnare the people." These observations with equal force in the context of subordinate legislation. . 12.15. In Harta v. State of Rafasthan, the Supreme Court had occasion to draw to the basic need for due publicity of laws.' Bose J. observed :-- i " ....... ..we are of opinion that it would be against the principles of 'natural justice permit the subjects of a State _-to be punished or penalised by laws of which __ i have no knowledge and of which they could not even with the exercise of diligence have acquired any knowledge. Natural justice requires that before a t "i. can become operative, it must be promulgated or published. It must be broad , ' . in some recognizable way so that all men may know what it is; or, at the _ ' least, there must. be some special rule or regulation or customary channel through which such knowledge-can be acquired with the exercise of due atii , , nable diligence. The thought that a decision reached in the secret recesises chamber to which the public have no access and to which even their accreﬁ I representatives have no access and of which they can normally know notliing, " nevertheless aﬁect their lives, liberty and property by the mere passing of a Resolution without aﬂffthing more is abhorrent to civilised man." 3 " F Bose I. also made a passing reference' to the Code Nepoleon of,France, the ﬁrst article which provides that law are executory by virtue of the promulgation thereof and that they '33] come into effect from the moment at which their. promulgation can become known. T ' 12.16. In the light of the aboye discussion, we recommend' that the statutory rules, bye laws and general' orders should not take place before their publication. ' 12.17. It may, incidentally, be pointed out that such an amendment will ﬁll in a gap in present law as regards orders. According to the Allahabad High Court," where a statutory does not indicate its date of commencement, it does not become effective. The only consequeﬁﬁ of the order being published in the ofiicialgazette is that it comes into being as a piece of -s§'J1:l-- ordinate legislation on the statute Book. -From this, it would not follow that -it becgntes. . with immediate effect. The High Court-pointed out that Acts of the Central I.egislat'1;e _ _ into force on assent, because the General Clauses Act says so. This judgment j_ _ we have stated above. - . I 12.18. While on the subject of publication, we should also refer to another needed in regard to access to subordinate legislation. Difficulty is often experienced in printed copies of subordinate legislation. In England, and in some other _ 191: countries, there is a statutory provision that printed copies of subordinate legislation. . Kerseel : Parliamentary Supervision of Delegated Legislation (1960), page 6. ' _ _ . 3, Sircecil Carr's Evidence, cited in Schwartz: Introduction to American Administrative Law. (I95$), page 3'}. . Hm-to v. State ofRa_,r'astha.n, A.I.R. 1951 S.C. 467. = . See proposed section as to the commencement ofrnles etc. (Para 12 .44 'B, infra]. . (a) ,5'!a?'1? v. Barmleilzar. A.I.R. 1969 All. 134, 186 E (D.-C. Uniyal J.) ' ( b) State v. Ram Chane', A.l.R. 1955 All. 526 (13.15). UIJ:n.l.oJ_l\-I'-' ..5._ 'l'.T available for sale to the public. Such a statutory provision can, at best, be directory only. We ' , think that adequate steps should be taken for ensuring that printed copies of subordinate legis- :.. i .5 . . I lation are available to the public at all times. Parliamentary Control 312.19. We now come to another safeguard pertaining to subordinate legislation, namely, R.,,,,,,,,,,,.m,,,,,,,,;',j'_ parliamentary control over subordinate legislation. 1'3TlIiﬁI11°I1*9-FY UOII . 12.20. In all democratic countries, Parliament exercises control over subordinate legislation. In England, there are elaborate provisions on this subject in the statutory Instruments Act, 1946. ::n_']'t'il1]}':'3i°5£l"lt_iu']"" In India, the Ministry of Law in consultation with the Committee of Lok Sabha on subordinate by Central Gov- Lcgislation' had evolved a model clause on this subject, which is inserted in every Act of Parliament °"""'"'* that permits the making of subordinate legislation. We recommend? that this clause (with some slight variations) should be included in the General Clauses Act . _ 12.21. In this connection a difficult question which arises is as to the propriety of providing Ru1 _ for laying on the table of Parliament of rules framed by a State Government under a, Central Act. G0' 5- ' :1; The problem has been considered in detail by the Committee of the Lok Sbha on subordinate Legishtion ; and in the light of the discussions with the relevant authorities, the Committee came to the conclusion that the best course would be to request the state Governments to have laws enacted, by their legislatures, to provide for laying of the rules framed by them before their respective legislatures. ' We do not express any view on this matter, because we think that so far as Acts of Parliament __,:ict:-ncerned, no satisfactory provision can, for the reasons mentioned by the Committee on , g in lrdinate legislation, be made in such Acts regarding rules made by a State Government. ' T 2 - ' :1 Application of the General Clauses Act to subordinate legislation |='? -, 12.22. We now consider the question of application ofthe General Clauses Act to sub- application or . - e General ordinate legislation. Chum M to statutory_iastru- meats. '£2.23. We have given careful consideration to the question whether the whole Act should Alﬂplicatioh of whole Act to apply to subordinate legislation and we have come to the conclusion that the Act should not, wbordggm lam, in tprnzsﬁ apply to such legislation. The practice in the Government of India is that subordinate 'N103 _ _ T '_ tion is ﬁrst prepared in the administrative Ministry. It is then sent to the Legislative 5 5 f _ nt (of the Ministry of Law) for scrutiny only". At the stage of scrutiny, it is ditﬁcult , for-the Draftsman in the Legislative Department to recast the original draft in the light of the _ Clauses Act . Moreover, subordinate legislation is of various kinds. Rules made under a _ to constitute only one form of such legislation. Such rules may, for convenience, be called "lullordinate legislation of the ﬁrst degree". ' Sometimes, orders are made under a rule, and, further, there are orders made under such orders. These may be called "subordinate legislation of the secon " and of the "third" degrees, respectively. A common illustration of such subordinate legislation may be found in the various orders made under the Defence of India Rules. Subordinate legislation of the second and third ' is not always sent to the Legislative Department for scrutiny. »._'~'..T- 1 It is also to be borne in mind that subordinate legislation is not expected to be drafted with that care which is bestowed on the drafting of,statute.of _Par1iamen_t._ A rigid application of the- Geaieral Clauses Act to subordinate legislation, is, therefore, likely to create some unforeseen oonipiications. Moreover, no practical difficulty has arisen in the interpretation of subordinate Iegiﬂation. I. See para l2.45, infra. '2. See also para 12.47 infra. ; 3. See also para 12.26 infra. § - = ! ?' E . _ C, . .......__.._ _____.,. ,.,,, , _ _____,_ '- . i 2 . , '1 Principles of the = Argo applied to nu rdinateleais. latinn. Supreme Court's approach. Change" not suggested'. l'ointsct_:nccrI1.- 1 mg sections 1 mg with subordi- nate legisinti-rm. Section 20- .- R Constructipn ;Of statutory unstru- meals. Section 2 !. A Supreme Court case. ' case were these. In exercise of a statutory? power, Government took over the manag1e¥l::1s1It'7' 1'8 12.24. While the courts have refused to apply the General Clauses Act to subordinate latio-n,----In terms, they have resorted to the principles of the Act in construing such legislation. The Madras High Court expressed itself' in favour of the view that on principles of justice, and good conscience courts have to apply the principles underlying the provisions of ' Clauses Act to the construction of statutory rules. In a Calcutta case? :1 similar view was taken. 12.25. The Supreme Court had occasion to consider" the question Whether the provisions of section 38 of the (English) Interpretation Act, corresponding to section 8 of the General Clans': Act, could he applied to construe a Charter constituting a High Court. Marajan J. (as he then- was) observed:--- "Assurrung, however, but not conceeding that strictly speaking the provisions of tlﬁ Interpretation Act and the General Clauses Act do not, for any reason a=pply,_'ﬂH see no justiﬁcation for holding that the principles of construction enunciated. it tlliﬁﬂ; provisions have no application for construing these charters." i ' 12.26. In view, however of the nature of subordinate legislation and the legislative followed in drafting such legislation, as mentioned in the above discussion} it is desirah that there should be a certain amount of ﬂexibility in applying the rules of interpretation to such legislation. Hence, no categorical provision as to the application, to s.u|::ordinate- of all the rules in the General Clauses Act , is recommended. Wherever necessary. we considered the desirability of extending individual sections to statutory instruments. _ _. Individual sections relating to subordinate legislation 12.27. We shall new deal with the amendments required in individual sections of the Clauses Act , relating to subordinate legislation. ' - 12.28. Section 20 deals with the construction of orders etc. issued under enactments. In this section, instead of the existing expressions referring to notiﬁcation, order, rule and have-laws etc. the comprehensive expression "statutory instrument" is proposed to he used. We' thereby recommend that section 20 should be revised as follows: Revised section 20 _ . . ,- 20. Expressions used in a statutory instrument made under a Central Act or Reirtiuli shall, unless the context of the statutory instrument otherwise requires. have the some rd __ E" nteanings as in the Act or Regulation. 12.29. Section 21 provides that power to issue notiﬁcations, orders, rules or bye-laws includes power to add to, amend, vary or rescind notiﬁcations, orders, rules or bye-laws. section sometimes gives rise to problems in its application to orders "issued under iti§&ii@.} Where the making of orders is circuirlscribed by conditions, the question arises how far ordeﬁi amending the original order have to comply with these conditions. i ' 12.30. The diﬂiculty is illustrated by a judgment of the Supreme Court.' The facts: in ._.,,,.,,,..;.,_, .. .311 undertaking, and vested its control in 'X'. One of the conditions for the exercise of" power was that the management was not previously being carried out properly. TE ____ . . . A L._L ﬂé? . In re. Chockalz'yrgarl11,A.I.Il. 1945 Mid. 52!. at _. . Benaori La! v. Emperor, A.I.R. 1943 Cal. 235. N5. Thread Ca. v'. James Chaick, A.I.R. I953 S.C. 357, 350. . Para 12.22. supra. . cf. para 12.2, supra. _ . K. P. Khaira.-1 v. Union offndia, A.l.R. 1957 S.C. 676. 685, (1957) S.C.R. 1052, 1073. o~I..n.p..5.aM>- . -.. _,.._..___._.........s...._....--_._-_......_.. , ,..__,.. because the enactment concerned does not contemplate an amendement in such a case} "provisions amended by the Ordinance before the next day. -upon by the Counsel for the State. After this judgment was pronounced, at validating Act was Jr, 79 was present when the original order was passed. Subsequently, it was decided to transfer the management from X to Y, and an amending order was issued accordingly. The question arose whether, at the time of the amending order, the condition that the management was not previously being conducted properly should have been complied with. The Supreme Court upheld the legality of the order; but the reasons given revealed a cohﬂicting interpretation of the section. S. K. Das J. adhered to the strictly literal construction of the Words "subject to the like.....................conditions," and maintained that these words applied in all situations and had been complied with in the case before the court. Sarita!" I. put a limited constrution upon them, and observed that these words meant that after the amending order is issued, all the provisions which would have governed the original order would govern the ameixdlng order also; for example, provisions limiting the duration of the original order. _ Such diﬂiculties will be avoided if the section is made subject to a dilterent intention. The application of the whole section may be excluded by a context. For example, where a. municipal corporation is superseded for a particular period, the supersession cannot be extended, It is also desirable to substitute the expression statutory instrument in this section.' 12.31. In the light of the above discussion we recommend that section 21 should be revised R . as £o1lows:-- - Revised section 21 21. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to make a statutory instrument is Power to_ amend conferred. then, unless the context orhsnvise requires, that power includes a power, mam" mm' exercisable in the like manner and subject to the like sanction and conditions {if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind the statutory instrument so made. lE.32. Section 22 provides for the making of rules or' byedaiws and issuing of orders between Seclon 21:. the passing and commencement of an enactment. 12,33. Some verbal changes are proposed in section 22 .3 In an Allahabad case,' a similar Agiahabad .~_3,,¢_ was relied upon to support a notiﬁcation which was issued on the 31st March, 1956, but which said that the amendment would 'come into eﬁect' on 151: April, 1956. The actual decision in that case was, that the corresponding section of the U.P. General Clauses Act did not to the facts of the case, as the whole Ordinance r according to the majority judgment) came into force immediately on 31st March, 1956, but no action could be taken under the ' 115.34. Incidentally, it may be noted that section 22 of the U.P. General Clausese Act, 1904, U. P. Amend- as by section 22 of Schedule II of the U.P. Repealing and Amending (Second) Act, '""'" "°f'"'"' '"- Issditprassed as Act 5 of 1957), has added certain words. After the words "application of the Act", the words "or in the exercise of any power eiﬁcﬁuble thereunder or under any enactment thereby amended", have been added. But, in the Allnliabad case cited above," these words, diough referred to, were not apparently relied passed! by the U.P. Legislature, but it was held to be fuﬁleﬁ. [ ' ' ' ' ' 'Ir Gapailaya Ram V. Stare ofMadhya Pratiesh. A.l.R. 1951 Nagpur 181, 133, para 6, 2. cf: para 12.2, supra. 1 Para 12.35, brﬁa. 4. Adam: Bhandar v. Sales Tax Oﬁicer, A.I.R. 1957 All. 41'5", 4533, para 52. 5. Adar-sh Blzandar v. Sales Tax Oﬁicer, A.I.R. 195? All 475, 432, per: 36. 5. Beirgalt'M'a1v. Sales Tax Oﬁicer, A.I.R. 1953 All. 473. Recommendation. Making of rules or bye-laws and issuing ocE_._ol-ders between passing and commence- ment of Act. Section 23 to be extended to all statutory instru- ments. Section 2 '5 (5). ' l "J _ Gujarat 80 The Supreme Court upheld a later validating Act' on the subject. The point of interpretation of the U.P. General Clauses Act was not, however in issue before the Supreme Court. " " ' 12.34-A. Orders of a substantive nature are not governed by the section, and, on '_ _ reasoning, it has been held" that a detention order under Act 61 of 1962, made " commencement of that Act, could not be justiﬁecl under this section. ' 12.3413. Where a particular part of an Act comes into force at once, and authorises making of the rules, then obviously, the rules can come into force though the other partsirltil not come into force". follows :---- Revised section 22 "22. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation which is not to come into force f on the passing or making thereof, a power is conferred-- ta) to make a statutory 2'.-asrrunlent, or (b) to issue orders with respect to-- (i) the application of the Act, or Regulation ................ .., or (ii) the establishment of any court or oﬁice, or (iii) the appointment of any Judge or oliicer thereunder, or (iv) the person by whom or the time when, or the place where, or the manner in which, or. the fees for which, anything is to be done under the Act or Regulation, then, that power may be exercised at any time after the passing of the making of the Regulation, but statutory instruntents or orders so In ' or issued shall not take eﬂect "till the commencement of the Act or Regula ' or. where all provisions of the Act or Regulation do not come into force" " L: 1? 3 same time, then till the commencement of the relevant provision. 12.36. As regards section 23 , we propose to extend it to all statutory instruments, i -S: i, ' to cases where a provision of an Act is not to come into force immediately. 12.37. Sub-sections (1), (2), (3) and (4) of section 23 lay down details as to the mam-.r of complying with the requirement for pre-publication,.and have not raised any serious : . Sub--sec.tion (5), however, has given rise to some difficulty. This "sub-section =. ioll'ows:-- = T T 5 ' "(s) The publication in the oral-hi gazette of a rule or bye-law puiponiiig to lian§_ " c ' made in exercise of a power to make rules or bye--law_s alter previous _. shall be conclusive proof that the rule or bye--law has been duly made? - 12.38. In a Gujarat case,' it was held with reference to section 23(5) that the _ _ authority must purport to make rules after previous publication, and the words "purpo _ . have been made", must go with the expression "after previous publication". -It was _-,_ 1. J'. K. Jule Mills v. U. P. (1962) 1 S.C.l_'t.. l. . _ , i 2. Venkareswariu V. SHp€H'?Ii'£ﬂd1€l'Ii'..j Central J'nl'.l, Hyderabad. A.I.R. 1953 S13. 49'. 50. 3. Kandoswami v. Emperor, (1918) I.L.R. 4i Madras 59, 73' , Napier J.- 4. See C. J. Shah V. Chhnbalal, (1968) Cr. L..l. 253, 254, para 1. (Gujarat). .:x 12.35. We recommend only verbal changes in section 22 , which should 31 since section 23 prescribes the lengthy procedure of previous publication, sub--section ['5] dispenses with proof that such procedure has been followed, only in cases where the rules purport to be made after previous publication. The actual decision in this case was over-ruled by a later decision of the same High Court ;1 but the construction placed on subsection (5) was not dismissed in the later case. 122.39. It is, of course, obvious that the presumption as to the rules or bye-laws having Pfegumpfjgu as bcen_"duly made" do'es not mean that the rules cannot be assailed if they are in excess of, or :?mi'§='gFe;[";':¢of_ - repugnant to, the parent Act, or if the rules are otherwise invalid. --n a-ugunnnur--- , . ,, . . . . M ' I 12.40. Also, the words "conclusive proo do not exclude the power of judicial review by -'.,g,"§.','1'£,,'i,.2 the High Court. r'r°°i"- In fact, the view taken appears to be" that even apart from the power of the High Court, the order can be challenged for want of notice. W-M «-x--......_n..._....- 1- -v 1:72.41. The existing section is conﬁned to rules and bye--Iaws. We propose use of the Other changes rc- I . words "statutory instruments", to cover all such instruments. ii" i Certain other verbal changes are also proposed in the section, in order to simplify it.-" .' I 12.42. It may be noted that section 1 of the Rules Publication Act, 1893. in England, Position in Eng-' land as to pre- ooiﬁined a. provision for compulsory pre-publication in respect of those statutory rules to puhlicamm the section applied. That Act has, however, been repealed by section 12 of the Sflutlary Instruments Act, 1946. Section 4 of the latter Act does not appear to contemplate compiﬂsory pre-publication. 12.43. Accordingly we recommend that section 23 should be revised as folIows:----- Rcmmmmdmon 3 5 Revised section 23 23. Where . . . . . . . . ..any Central Act or Regulation confers on any authority power to Making of sta- make a statutory instrument subject to the condition of the statutory instrument *'%*t:1'Yi"-'_l"""1'"" being made after previous publication. then the following provisions shall apply, §.,1,1'.-'.§§§.',.'.E""' namely : ---- (a] the authority ............. .. shall ﬁrst publish a draft of the proposed instrument [5, t23(l)';iaid' for the information of persons likely to be affected thereby, together with a 9- 5353 I notice specifying the date on or after which the draft will be taken into consideration; (b) the publication shall be made in such manner as the authority deems to be suﬂicient, or, if the empowering provision in the Act or Regulation so requires, in such manner as the Goverment concerned directs; ls. 23(2)] v -....._..».-......___ .....g1--u...--at----..t............m.....,, _ , .._,... _ __ ,..._..-_..._ __,,.t«------ - -.r-.- . . . i . E (c) . . . . . . . . .. any objection or suggestion . . . . . . . . . . received by the authority p 23" . ~_ E ............. ..from any person with respect' to the draft before the date speciﬁed 3' H ' t} E' , in the notice shall be considered by it, and. where the statutory instrtmtent is 7;? ' ' E to be made with the sanction, approval or concurrence of another authority, '' i also by that authority. before the instrument is finally made: (ti) the publication in the otﬁcial gazette of a statutory instrument purporting to have been made after previous publication in exercise-of a power to make 2. such statutory instrument shall be conclusive proof that the statutorv instrument i has been made in compliance with the provisions of this section. I 1. M. R. Partdytr v. Chimanioi, A.I.R. 1968 Guj. Sﬂﬂparas. 13 and ]4_ ., 2. Amomobiie Transport Rojas-than LI'd., v. The State ofkqinsthan. A.I.R. 1962 Raj. 24. 3. See para 12.43. inﬁ-a. _ at 32 ' mﬁimt -1.2.44. As'to statutory rules, and bye---la1_.vs as already stated' we propose a new provision, _, _.,_ud.pub1icaﬁon providing for (1) publication of rules, and (11) the date of commencement in relation to rules :: i;{rul§;a(tInJt:3 and bye laws. Attention may be drawn, in this connection, to the recommendation made man ' earlier Report' of the Law Commission, where a reference is made to the (English) S Instruments Act of 1946, and to the necessity of ensuring proper publication of statﬁff iristrurnents and other connected matters." Retrospective 12.-MA. We also think it desirbale to provide that retrospective operation mnnot be p . °P°'3"°n- to such rules and bye--laws without express authority. 12.44B. We therefore recommend that regarding publication and commencement' Reeom.menda- " , , - _ tion to insert bye--Iaws and general orders of the Central Government and their respective eﬂect," the following 5°°ﬁ°" "°5"'d' new section may be inserted'-- ing publication ' and eosnmenco - , ' wig 3? '''23A. (1) Every rule made or l:-ye--lcw approved 'or general order issued bv the Central 7 gene]''[ "gm, Government on or after the . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . ." under any Central A_§'t_ 9f the C""''51 or Regulation--- M' ' Government. (a) shall be published in the oﬂicurl gazette. and (la) Shall, in the absence of an express provision to the contrary either in tile ﬂil._II bye-law or general order or in the Central Act or Regulation under which 5' is or approved or issued, come Into force on the day on which it is published it; §.'C'»1J o ﬁﬁciai gazette. (2) No such rule or bye-law or general order shall come into force fromrr die earlier than the date on which it is made or approved or issued by the Cerltml Government, unless the Central Act or Regulation under which it is made or approved or issued expressly confers a power to give it such eﬁect. ; , ' _ _ v _ _ : ''Expianation.--In l'hI.$ .'i'€(,'fiI'}ﬂ, the expression --- genera! order" means an order which ' ' aﬁects the public." - ' [am or ;a:u- 12.45. We also propose a new provision as to the laying of rules before Parliament as P '""'°'"' already stated.' It may be noted that the existing formula (found in most recent Acts) was evolved after a _ series of discussion in the Lok Sabha Committees on subordinate legislation. -E The proposed new section will apply only to rules made by the Central Government. _ We are adding that annulment or modiﬁcation made in the role so laid should be publislad in the gazette. 1. Para 12.16 supra. 3 2. 14:11 Report, vol. 2. page 707. para 25- __ 3. Also see para 12.14 supra _ _ x 4. Para 12.44, supra. ' 5. Para 12.4-4A, supra. 6. Date of cornmencement of the amendlmn! AOHO be '=|1¢9_l'°d- - 7. Para 12.20, supra. ' i_ "_ 8. See theifollewing 'Reports of that Co1'nmittee:--v (1) First Report (First ink Sam} 1954' '1» P" 1-1* - {ii-'p Third Report on Lok Sabha}_. Mar. 955. page 7- para 36- t ' (iii) Sixth Report (1st Lok sabhatﬂnd Decembm 1955» P8593 13 and 14» 9"' 7'"° 30- § . , ' (iv) Fifth Report {End Lok Sabha) 5th May, 1959, pages 3 and 9, para 4] to 4-4 and-page 26. '3 f (V) Seventh Rcport.(21'n'.l Lok Sabha). paces 7 and 8. para 4230 45- " . _ ' r i T 1 ! 83 12.46. It may also be of interest to note here that Madhya Pradesh General Clauses Act ' 1 makes speciﬁc provision for standardising the procedure to he followed, when any Madhya Pradesh Act directs that a rule be laid on the table of the Legislative Assembly. 25- -e . 1' 12.47. We recommend that the new section should be as fo]lows:-- SECHIOH ' --.;3--;:'_._.-,]:.-; 1313. (1) Every rule made under any Central Act by the Central Government on ornuln to bghld arter the.. . . . . ..day of . . . . . . . . . . .33 shall be laid, as soon as may be after 319:' 7"" it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirt;-,r days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions; and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the stwamﬁvc sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modiﬁcation in the rule or best: Houses agree that the rule should not be made the rule shat! thereafter have}.-ﬂeet-. only in such modiﬁed form or be of no effect, "as the case may be, so however thmr. I any such modiﬁcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the '|'ﬂil3l'f3t*-Of, .F- - anything previously done under that mic. 7 .' I:l-.-I!'.i (2) Every such modiﬁcation or annulment shall be published in the official gazette. Modiﬁcation. - . 13.48. In section 24 , which provides for the continuance of notiﬁcations etc. issued under 5,,"-at , I a law, certain verbal changes are recommended, namely, the substitution of the. amjtnsive expression 'statutory instrument' in place of rules, etc. Our recommendation. " thew! , I is as follows:-- . Section 24- ! :11: section 24 ,' for the words "notiﬁcation, order. scheme, rule, form or bye-laIr"," ' ' ' ' wherever they occur, the words "or statutory instrument" shall be substituted. . In swtion 25, reference to the new Code of Criminal Procedure "should he sllbltithted. Our recommendation, therefore, is as fol1o\'vts:----- swam 1,' x ' TY-T ' 7 ' 2 - 7 ,' ,_,..';,- .:_z1 '' ' E - - . :"_: e -' in section 25 , for the words' "the Code-of Criminal Procedure for the time being in . I force", the words, and figures and comma 'Tthe Code of Criminal Prooedu1'e,- 1974" e ' shall be substituted. --~: r ' 1-} Section 24A. Msdhya Pradesh General Clauses Act. 2. Insert date of commencement of amending Act. 3. This can apply to existing Acts also. 15 M at Lawt14--12 * ~al:«c.:.I.'.~..'.'.-2; = . . . CHAPTER 13 SEVERABILITY Hf°d"¢'°'Y- 13.1. We new deal with a matter of constitutional signiﬁcance, relevant to the Generﬂ ' ,,_._, J, ,_.CIauses Act. --:'.f :s' :2. - ' . I T SeverabiIity--r.¥:e problem Question" of 13.2. The question relates to "severability". In countries having a rigid constitution, the in"$§? possibility of a statute being declared void is, in general, implicit. Now, a'sta1:.1te may be partially valid (being in part in conformity with the Constitution), and partially invalid (heig in part in conﬁict with the Constitution). Judicial determination of invalidity of the whole A3 israre, but not so rare is the determination of invalidity of a part ofthe ACL lb such cases, the question arises whether the invalidity of a part of the Act aﬂects the entire Act, so that the Act fails as a whole, or whether the valid portion survives. The broad principIe.- : '_ ; _ _ A the valid portion can _so survive, is new recognised in almost all countries which have 'a ' e"° '*"'""' 'Constitution. T ' i ii»! 3 5' _ 13.3. In India, the possibility of partial invalidity is implicit, at least in respect ~- " _ Tvvith fundamental rights, because, under article 13(2) , a_ law inconsistent with' _ ' 1 rights is void ":0 the extent of the inconsistency'. The question that arises is how "-- ' be severed into portions which are void and those which are not. ' e " ' 13.4. In R. M. D. Cltamarbaugwalla v. Union of India } the Supreme Courtdiscussed the " question of severabiiity at length. The Court also summarised certain rules of construction hi] down "by the American Courts, in regard to the question of severahility"of a statrnzeitfortthe pur- pose of determining the question of its constitutional validity). It is not necessary to quote . 7 the, discussion in full. It is sufﬁcient to state that judicial decisions in India, have, .1: n.;.:.-:,=t"£ollowed his iudgment. Broadly speaking,' if a part of an Act is void. the rest is"not,'5'.§ehlH., if it can be separated. I ' Faun in 13.5. In Canada, a similar principle is recognised. The doctrine was stated as follows' :' T Canada. "Thus sort of question arises not infrequently and is often raised {as in the present-instnigq) by asking whether the legislation is infra vires 'either in whole or in part,' but this : , that-when Part II is declared invalid, what remains of the "Act is' to be examined bit by ' nrder to determine whether the Legislature would be acting within its powers if it passed j remains. The real question is whether what remains in is so in: ' ' bound up with the part declared invalid that what remains cannot in- dependently survive, or, as it has sometimes been put, whether on a fair review of the white matter, it can be assumed that the Legislature would have enacted what survives without enact- ing the part that is ultra wires at all." - . General ptIn- 13.6. The general principle, thus, is that as far as possible, total invalidity of an Act visit. be avoided. The observation of Cardozo (sitting in the New York Court of Appeals'-',_ "laws are not to be sacriﬁced by courts on the assumption that legislation is the play of and fancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Our right to destroy is bound by (the) limits of Our duty is to save unless in saving we pervert."«----is true of the approach of courts in to partial invalidity also. i -. 1. R.M.D. Citamarbaughwalla v. Union ofi'.-rdia, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 628, 636, 637 ; (1957) S.C.R.. 930. 2. Reference re-Alberta Bill of Rights (1947), A.C. S03 {P.C.). . . . , ._ , _ ,_ ' 3. People v. Knapp. (I920) 230 N.Y. 48, referred to in Stern, "Separability and separability SI Harvard Law Review 76. I'll), footnote 110. . 84 --- --------r...--.----..--.-...--.'.....-....--.._.......-.. .. - .......w.........-.__..____._-._ .14' 85 13.7. In the U. S. A., the broad principles as to divisibility or indivisibility _ewer_e a_t._ﬁrst 313335 referred to only in Mr. Justice Sutherland's opinion1 in an early case, and these have gradually USA. "' ooiueue be accepted by the entire Court. Mr. Justice Butler mentioned them in Champlirr Refin- v. Corporation Conrmisston," Mr. Justice Roberts relied upon them in the Railroad alter!-érnenr case,3 and in the Carter case,' even the dissenting Justices seemed to approve of them. 13.8. But the contours of this broad principle are not so well deﬁned, and its practical Diﬂ1§II1t'0l pa hqation is not very easy. Primarily, this question belongs to the domain of constitutional 3"' 'flint justilicatiou for adverting to this subject in a discussion of the law of interpretation arises B'y5rei.son'of the -fact that in-some count.ries, there have come to be inserted what are known as ""s*epa'nbiiity" or "sevcrability" clauses. _ _ = 13.9. Before proceeding to discuss the form andecontent of such clauses, it would, be Three sinntium. _ dcsirah__l_e to mention that the problem of separability arises in three types of situations, ' 'ii Iii)' Part of the Act is invalid as to all possible applications of the Act,--i.e. as to all possible areas. {ii} Whole Act is inyalid, but the invalidity is conﬁned to a part of all possible' "appli- ' cations"; and ' - ' e : t_»iii)-' Part of the Act is invalid, and that too in relation to only a partlof the "app1ications". - _ . :_ ﬂiihﬂ; "Severability" clauses, broadly speaking, provide that if any part of the Actis found , to be_;invalid, the remainder of the Act should nevertheless be upheld. As has been pointed but, :]',u,.,,_ the authority of a court to eliminate the invalid elements and yet to sustain the valid elements,' are not rﬁyiderived from the Legislature, but from powers inherent in the judiciary. The utility _qf_ ..severability clause lies in its replacing the prwumption which would be otherwise appli- ' ' t the statute was meant to be indivisible. This presumption is replaced by a'presump- "favour of severabilityﬁ As Justice Brandeis stated. in case often cited, such a clause ' "a rule of construction, which may aid in determining the "legislative intent, "but it is "merely; not an inexorable command"! ;_ ;;1_ _,;l_1:.A severability clause may be generalin form, in: the sense that it merely provides Fornpiet nevu- _51jppt,,_e,invalidity of one part of the Act shall not affect' the rest. Or, the clause could be speciﬁc. gﬁhe qtiﬁarability clause would, then, refer to the particular sections of the Act or to those appli- rs! and Special. cations of the Act which the legislature really intended' to stand alone (in case of a declaration of invalidity of the remainder). ' 3515.12. A few hypothetical examples will illust_1;ate what is stated above. One possible forgo Exampht _£or_u seyerability clause could be as follows :-- ' - ' ' "" ""'I-'he provisions of Chapter are sever-able, and if any of its provisions or_their-apqpli; 5P9=l31 cations? are held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent j ~§lF decision of the court shall not aﬁector impair _any_ of the rernaining pt'0_3liSj§1§lS__.:n 3, or "implications-of the ?Arti'cle." . ' - -_ e __ '*" 'iT'Wrttzas»:rv. Standard once. (1929) 213 vs. 235.-. ... . . . _ 2. Champltn Reﬁning Co. v. Corporation Commission , (1932) 186 _U.S. 110, 234. 3. Railroad Retirement Board v. Alton R.R. (1935) 295 U.S. 350, 369. ' 4. Carter v. Carter Coat Co. (1936) 298 U.S. 238, 312, 321-", 34. ' 5. Wr'I£z'a.-rr v. Srnrrdurrf oz: Co., (1929) 73 l_.awyers es. 23:5-' J ' E. Dorchy v. State ofK-unsns, (1924) 68 Lawyers Ed. 55.6. fl 86 A Another possible form is the following :-- General fouls. "If any provision of this Act or the application thereof to any person or tanccs is held invalid, the invalidity shall not aﬁect other provisions or app' ' of the Act which can be given eﬁect to without the invalid provision or and, to this end, the provisions of this Act are severable." Another form would be: 5°°°m '°""" "If any part, section, sentence, or clause of this ordinance shall be adjudged vdd. _ no eﬁect, such decision shall not ailect the validity of the remaining ordinance. For the purposes of this section, expressly considered to be separable." There is yet another form suggested by a writer' 1-- 5909"! 1°11 "It a part of this Act is invalid, all valid parts which are severable from the invalid 1 remain in eﬁect. If a part of this Act is invalid in one or more of its applications}: part iemains in efﬁect in all valid applications that are severable from the irlvlld applications." . = Pravisign in 13.13. The Australian interpretation Act has this provision". "Every Act sha11.be:1;ead old I Anita" construed subject to the Constitution, and so as not to exceed the legislative power of --the ' monwcalth, to the intent that where any enactment thereof would, but for this Section, have construed as being in excess of that power, it shall nevertheless be a valid enactment to the mint to which it is an act in excess of that power." ﬂﬁﬂu 13.13A. This section was ﬁrst inserted in the (Australian) Acts Interpretation Act in 191). . - a p The provision was described at the time as being one "mainly directed against the ti:-ctrilu of 5 ' inseverability". - - _ It was explained, in the course of the second reading speech in the Senate, es=foIlows,:--- _ "Where a measure deals with a subject as to which legislative power is divided bergﬁfn the Commonwealth and the States, and the line of demarcation between theses ---e- "powers of the Commonwealth and the States has not been completely ﬁid 7- ,ii it has been found necessary, in certain cases such as the Navigation A provision, in terms similar to those appearing in clause 23 of this Bill, ' "I-_3 _ the intention of the legislature not to exceed its powers and to secure the =-- ' _- i"- of the Bill up to the ofjthcse powers and no further. Such a - -1 _ .- _ - ' ' :_._;}, if considered, protects the Act in which it appears from being declaredwrliﬂyi where any portion of it would, but for this provision, have been capable er ' unconstitutional construction." - "The High Court (of Australia) held in 1910 that where the valid and invalid Que' an Act are inseparable or 'wrapped up in the -same word or expression', the whole._-m1__It .2-3'2" .' , , _ "The argument of inseparabﬂity was in 1921 used against the Navigation Act in N ' 7 ' - it "C and Hunter Rive-r7 Sreantrftip Co. Lttiuillld :OtFIa*s v. "the Attaf-ﬂ¢.'f'G¢"8¥'¢l J'03'~?5li" -' '1 wealth and another'. The fact that the a provision which is now; --- -- rnade -common to "Commonwealth was the reason given why=the argument felled. ' I accordingly, certain sections of the Act were declared to rcrnaitt e.Ecctivc'to the. -~---:"-I 'T _ lirnitdecidedhy--the-court.'-' . - . _ , . 1. Dickerson, Legislative onftins 6195*). run 110. . 2. Section 15A, (Australian) Acts Injufpruaijen mu. 1901-1951. _, 3. la) Boarmakers Care, 11 C.L.R. 1, 54, 55 ; '5 lb) Owners of.S'..S'. Kaiibrir v. Wilson, ll C.L-IL: 589, "£13. _ 4. Newcastle etc. v. .-LG. for the Commonwealth 19 CLR. 35?. 8? 13.14. 'Where a general form1 of severability clause is adopted, there is a practical diﬁiculty, at inasmuch as it will be necessary for the court to consider whether the severability clause itself sgygfgbility applies or not to a particular provision. ¢13'1'°- '.' It would appear that the utility of such a clause would be very limited ; and however careful the drafting may be, it may not be easy of application. 13.15. riic form could he more speciﬁc. But the use of the speciﬁc separability ciaiicc= may ccoimc-_E§ be open to ohiection, as it would call the attention of critical lawyers to those provisions of -h 3'} :::°'ﬂmbi§'t;" law which are deemed by the legislature itself to he most susceptible to constitutional attack. clause. iﬁtho; it might conceivably make judicial approach more inclined to held invalid the particular provﬁions referred to. At the same time, it may he more useful than a general severability clause. - .1116. In the United States, one writer has icmai.-nods that separability p1'OVlslDl1.8.I.tc---.nl§? r signiﬁcant only because of their absence. "Like articles of clothing, if they are present, . attention is paid to them, but if they are absent, they may be missed." . Conclusion I , 11E 7:-:.~}.:'i , i_li341"i'. We have, on a consideration of various aspects of the matter as discussed Concl ' : come to the conclusion that there is no need to insert sncha clause in our General Clauses Act . _ -.1.-Pure I3. 12. uipru. ' 2. Para13.12, supra. . 3. Robert Stern. "separability and separability clauses" (1937-38) 5} Harvard Law Review 76, 122. ..i_ 2. 3' , K.'---------:-------.._-. .-r FICHINHJI-wen. .i. .1 '9-w7*-- |...... | 1 Section Englilh law I'.'t.i a-,' CHAPTER 14 OFFENCES UNDER SEVERAL ENf'tCTMENTS . .a:.n- 14.1. In this Chapter we deal with acts or omissions constituting offencesunder e1act=rnm,---- ' a matter dealt with in section 26 of the Act, which reads as follows :-- - __ W . V 'E3 or ' _ - "26. Where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two or more the offender shall be liable to be prosecuted and punished under either" or these enactments, but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same The latter part of the section isimportant, concerned as it is with several interesting dept- rincsof criminal jurisprudence, including, in particular, auzrefois convic1'and-'diJfre:§Ji.§»iaaquI1 and the protection against double jeopardy.- The protection against double jeopardy is in our Constitution', in Article 20(2) , which reads as follows:---- ' a 7 ' 31' 5 I 'ii'-'T533'! "No person shall be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once." 14-.1A. The fundamental principle of the plea of aufrefois acquit as laid down by the judﬁl of England in 179s= and as stated by writers earlier than that date, has been consistently It was thus stated in 1848 in BRODM'S LEGAL MAXIMS '{ 2nd Edm) 2-57; = ' '1'! '7 ->-1I*>'- "and this plea is clearly founded on the principle, that no man shall be placed in peril-'41 legal penalties more than once upon the same acct1sation--nentti'debtf5:'.r pm uno deh'cto." " " '- The general principle that a man must put twice in peril for the same olience in been held by the English Courts to be applicable even where the 'previous acquittal or convicting: was in a foreign oountryi. In 1918, this principle was applied' by the Court of Criminal Arqietll in a case where the accused, a Belgian Army Otﬁcer, had been acquitted by a Belgian Court tial in a trial held in Calai. It may be noted that this principle of the common law was extended by section 33 of k; English Interpretation Act to statutory oﬁcnces'. ' i There are similar statutory provisions .on the subject in section 3D'of the (Australian) Aﬁ ' Interpretation Act, 1901 to 1957 and in the Canadian Law'. 14-.1B. Historically, the famous conﬁict between Henry II and Archihishop Becket' cork a stitutes a debate regarding double jeopardy. In the Constitution of Clarendon issued by Henry II in 1164, in Clause II], Henry II proposed that an ecclesiastical clerk who was accused of felony was ﬁrst to be brought into the Kiugfs courts to plead to the charge and establish that -In was a clerk; then, without a trial in the King's courts, he was to be taken by a royal oﬂieer to Q 1. Article 20(2). - : 2. R. v. VnndercombandAbbati'. (1195), 2Leac|1at p. 120, cited in 13.1-.1'. -.r. Conneﬂy (1954) 2 All at p. 416. 3. R. v. Roche (1775) 1 Leach I34, 164 English Reports 169 (Aoquittal by a Dutch Court in South Airioal. 4. R. v. Amer , (1913) 13 Criminal Appeal Reports mt. . ' ' 5. R. v. Thomas , (1950) 1 King's Bench 26. 6. Section 11 , Criminal Code (Canada). '7. See generally--- ' (a) Pollock and Maitland, History of English Law, Vol. 1, page 439 H ; (b) Holdsworth, History of English Law, 7th Bdn. (1956), Vol. 1, pp. 615 ff. .....-_..._..........-.---1--..--_.._......_. ._.. 39 courts for trial, and,if convicted and degraded there', he was to be returned to the King's courts to be sentenced according to law". Becket had a fundamental objection to' this scheme. Becket opposed the proposal on the ground that further punishment in the Kinp's Courts would violate the maxim Nema bis in idfpsum--no man ought to be punished twice for the same ' ottence.-_ '-TIE' continental law'. the concept is referred to as Non Bis in Idem, and has been traced to", iii ﬂibﬂon by Justinian.' ' 14.2. In India the rules of criminal process, known to lawyers as outrefois acquis and autre $l1U'ﬂf_0h fqis convict, ﬁnd expression in the Code of Criminal Procedure , and are considered so important :,;1::,t;"'_ _ tbi1'1'a:'s_eparate Chapter was assigned to them in the Code of 1893. The principle on which the Vicllilh ' 1 'rest is----a 'man may not be put twice in jeopardypfor the same offence". ' ':1' mm," The provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure " is very elaborate. For our present put'.-1 1:IJee.'secti_on 300(1) is of great importance. It reads as follows :-- "3'DDO[1] a person who has once been tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction for an ' oﬁence and convicted or acquitted of such oﬁence shall, while such conviction or 'acquittal remains in force, not be liable to5be- tried again for the same offence, nor on the same facts for any other oiience for which a different charge from the one ihade against him might have been made under sub-section (1) of section 221, or for which he might have been convicted under sub-section (2) thereof." 5 on us The "provision in section 26 of the General Clauses Act is based on the same principle. Bil in-notconﬁned to the situation where there has been a prior proceeding, and would appear enough to bar simultaneous double prosecution also. - l-II.'2.A. provision analogous to the 1atter:part': section 26 is to be found in section 71 swam 11_ of the Indian Penal Code also'. We need not discuss it in detail. LP.C. 14.213. Of course, it should be pointed out that section 26 has a positive as well as a negative Two purl: unﬁt, The positive or permissive content is in the eprlier part, where there is a liability to be ':'_'.£,5_'°°'i°"' ' (ed and punished under either of the two enactments, or any of more than two'enaci:rnents live or prohibitive part is in the latter part of the section, under which thereis tum- 'to=be punished twice for the same oﬁence. -We" shall discuss the principle of this _._.. r 'If-I_.3. '_I'he principle that no person shall vexed twice for the same crime was %;lbn1j'l;.Iodson in Connolly v. n.1=.1=.,a "as one which is ﬁrmlyeestablished in our law. but, as. h,s'm.- . show, is not easyof consistent aipplicajion". What is meant or involved in tﬂf wqﬁ""'_the same crime"? It_is in answer to is'questi_on that so much diﬁculty has arisen?' and, to quote Lord Hodson again, "so much at niei1t'hak been entertained down to the present day only in this country, but in other coui1tries'vihere3 the common law prevails"; - . T __ i . ' 1'. Degradation was a punishment. I ' ' See Richardson and Sayles, The Governance of Medieval; England from the Conquest to Magna Carta [EC1iJ.'1burgl1, (1963), pp. 239, 306.] 3. See Bnrrkus v. Iﬂinoie, (1959) 359 us. 121, 154, npte (31:91: 1.). . 4.- (.3 Justinian, o. 43. 21.2 and c. 9, 2,9, quoted in Harwarci nxsarches in International Law (19351 :9 Agnes- mn Journal of International Law, Supplement p. 431, 602 ; V (b) Jolowics, Roman Foundations of Modern Law (1957), p. 31 , 94. 5. See Archbold, Criminal Pleadings, etc., (1966) page 122, paragraph 436 and page 130. pa.ragraph_ #53. 6. Section 300. Code of Criminal Procedure , 19?4. fr,-seese:_:tion7l,2r1d pa.ra., I.P.C .. , 8. Connolly v. D.P.P. (1964) 2 All ER. 401, 428 (I-LL). .- 90 The classic statement of the principlevis to be found in Hawkins' Peas of the isas follows: "that a man shall not be brought into danger of his life for one and the same more than once." - ' ' "From whence it is generally taken, byall the books, as an undoubted that where a man is once found 'not guilty' on an indictment or appeal free from error, its! well commenced before "any court which hath jurisdiction of the cause, he may, by ﬁn.-030%; law, in all cases whatsoever, plead such acquittal in bar of any subsequent for the same crime". This lucid statement by Hawkins, has never excelled, though it 3 often elaborated'. .;' ﬂ"'**'- d. 14.4. In order to constitute the "same crime", the essential ingredients should be the lit the "Iii-' " ' In E. v. Kupferbergiﬂ for example, an acquiﬂal on a charge of conspiring to contravene a re , lation was held not to found a-plea of autrefois acquit on a charge of aiding and ahetﬁngu Y": contravention. A. T. Lawrence, J. said : - - W e "For a plea of autrefois acquit to be rnaintainahle, the offence of which has been acquitted and. that with which he is charged. must be I sense that each must have tIie;samc cs.-:enn'al i'ngrcdient.s4. The facts which cﬂfr stitute the one must he suﬂioieut to justify a conviction for the other." 14.5. The statement of the law by Hawkins' was approved in D.P.P. v. Casually'. with this comment : e ' "The phrases 'the same essential ingredients' and 'the facts which constitute' it to be noted. They denote and, in iiijvview, correctly denote an tion from that which merely that the same _facts rnay bc.teiesun1-ilzjﬁi of two charges, or.that some evidence which is given in one case may bi given as being relevant in another." a -- - - 'I A conviction or acquittal, then, bars punishment for the "same offence". _,,,_ 14.6. The Constitution, Artic1e,20(2)7, does not. in terms, mention it , ¢,,"3,,"',;,°"£,,}};°,, but the Code of Criminal Procedure doesﬁand the. Code goes on to captain in _ Pi'ocedII'I. ' implications of the expression 'same offence'. Six illustrations form part of this j, ' ' plaining, in concrete form, the different situations which the Courts rnav have to " "I," - 14.6A. Going back to' section 26 , we may note that the section presents a.nu_nibpr ii in ambiguities. Is it, for example, penni.-isihle-to prosecute a person under all the ' 1151 is to say----to frame a charge for ofthe oﬁences? It is usually understoodrpﬁnti charge can be framed for each of the oﬁ+=:nr.-es,---sub]ect to the provision regarding .2 } ptmishmetlt. However ambiguity in this regard is caused by the words.."eith'e_r or. I -_ = the earlier part of the section". The 8-mbi£l1ltY--'l5h°"3h 3 Sliﬂht ,7 whether the limit regarding punishment applies at the same prosecution, or whether @ - A . - » I * 1 - ---- ' ' to successive prosecutions, or whether it applies to both. The word twice. is "'3, Hawkins, Pleas of the Crown [ism nan. (ism-voi. 2, p. 515] citedin Carmel} v. om-. om) 1'-.«i:n;n_.? 401, 428 (H.L-)- , 2, E.g. Miles (1390) 24 one. 423, 43}; tH.In1dm'1-lo =: -q . ' ' _ E, v, Kupferberg. (1918) 13 ct. Appjksp. 1$,' lﬂ'quoted in Cantrell): 7. D.P.P.-(196432 'AI'-Isl'. H1,--415.: Emphasis supplied. ; I . Para. 14. 3. NIPFE . _ . D.P.P. v. Connolly, (1964) 2 5" W-Pu 401. 433'(H4L-I ' "» . Para.14.2.5P4Pm- _ . '_ - .2 _ Section 300 , Code of Criminal Procedure, 19?4 {and corresponding provision-lathe 139! 9_ mg ggction is quoted in para. 14.1, supra. ' '.03 E7. OO-.ld'tUI-_b- 91- whether multiple punishment. is possible. Ambiguity in this regard is created by the phrase "furnished twice". In one of the Andhra Pradesh cases----In re Bapaniafﬂ decided under the section. it has been stated : - "It is left to the prosecutor or the authority concerned to choose under which enactment or enactments an oﬁender shall be prosecuted when the act or, omission alleged against him constitutes an oﬁence under two or more enactments. But in the event of the prosecution being launched under two or more enactments, the punishment should be under one alone of those enactments." The point was also advertcd to in a judgment of the Supreme Court- Balirh V. Bangachariz. A consideration of the section in some detail would, therefore, be useful with reference to the problems that have arisen. 14.7. It may be stated that these three ambiguities3 are really facets of the obscurity which exists on the major question whether prosecution and punishment under both the enactments are permissible. In this context, two situations have to be considered separately'. The ﬁrst situation is where an act made by, two more statutory provisions ("enactments"), really constitutes the "same olfence",----Here, though the legal labels given to the offences are different, the ingredients thereof are indcntical-'. It is by reason of the accidents of legislation that the act happens to fall under two or more enactmcntsﬁ. Such cases, though infrequent, can arise because of the fact that one aspect of the act is dealt with more prominently in one enactment, while another aspect is given prominence by another enactment. Essentially, there is only one culpable act; and, though different legal labels lead to two or more "offences", the offender should not re- ceise puiﬁshment for more than one of them. They are not distinct. he considered stitutills 31¢ Elma i4.8. The second situation' is where acts made penal by two or more statutory provisions (ii) Acts consti- '{"enact1pents") constitute really distinct offences. Some of the ingredients are common, but ':j;"s"§y'"r:';'§:; of they not altogether identicals. The offences being distinct, it is logical to permit separate difference it-_-tin- punishments. At the same time, to avoid oppressiveness", the aggregate of such punishments g'°di'""' II should ﬂat exceed the maximum prescribed for the most serious of the offences of which -the 7 olfettderis convicted. . - :3- If a provision could be framed on the above lines, it would be just in its substance, and more clirar in its form than the present section. 3 shall make our recommendation on this basis attgthe appropriate place". But we would like to explain in some detail the signiﬁcance of the twin situations referred to above. Separate sub-sections desirable. 14.9. At this stage, we may state that in order to make the provision in section 26 more clear, itﬁis desirable to deal in separate sub--sections with the general rule and the rule applicable to": situation. The general principle should be that Where an act or omission is made punishuile under two or more enactments. the offender shall be liable to be punished under 1. re Bapaniair. A.I.R. I970 AJ'. 47, 55, paragraph 13(Ven1tateswara R/ac J.}. 1. Qaliah v. Rortgacirari, A.I.R. i969 SEC. T01; para. 14.15, irgﬂa. . 3. Earn. 14.6, supra. ' 4. fl 42nd Report {Penal Code). page 75, para 3.72, (discussing section 7 ], Penal Code). ' 5. ca) Cf. Emp.V.B.lIt3gI'It1.l, ma. 1931 Born. 4952 ; i (b) Durga Charon v. Isstitussin. A.l.R. 1948 Cal. 6, T, {Wrongful conﬁnement for purpose of extortion- sections 347' and 384, I.P.C .). ' 6. See also (a) Buffet}: 1-'. Rangachari, A.I.R. 1969 S.C. T01 ; ( b) Han' V. State of Maharashtra , 73 Born. LR. E91. 7. See 42nd Report, page 76, para. 3.73, and also page 422, proposed section 36. 3. See illustrative ease in para. 14.10, infra. \ 9. See, in particular, para. 14.12, irrﬂa. ll). Para. 14.18 thfra. 15 M of ]'saw!'i'4«-13 Two situations to i ii) A-ctua|1y_ c.o_n~ cﬁence. , ~ _---,_r.;_ -- - case-law. -j-----.«-r-....«.........'.......... . . 92 any one, but not under more than one, of those enactments', if the ingredients are identiﬁcal. As regards the special situation, namely, where the same act or omission constituting an oﬁenoe under any other enactment or enactments, in conjunction with any ingredient or ingredients the rule should be that prosecution and punishment for each of such offences is permissible, but the aggregate of the punishments is not to exceed the punishment awardable for the most serious the offences. In practice, most cases would fall under the special situation, and the object of making the position clear as regards this special situation is that if cumulative punishments were without any limitation as to the quantum in the aggregate, there will be hardship and oppres- sion. The matter could be illustrated from a few decided eases. 14.10. Under the Opium Act , for example, possession of opium and transport or ﬂiuﬂ (contrary to the provisions of the Act or any other enactment relating to opium or contrary to rules trained under the Act), are two separate offences. Mere possession of opium may on t the proved facts of a particular case, involve any question of transporting it. If_'so,,_ _ only one offence. Similarly, the transport of opium may not include the element If I i in every case. A person may transport opium through" various agencies, and yet not _ possession of it at the time it was transported. In such a case, there is only one oﬁencef person may transport opium, and also he in possession of it. In such a case, that "person woulill be guilty of two ofIences,--rransporting opium, and being in possession of hi. But justice that the punishment for the two oﬁences should not exceed that prescribed for the higher of two offences, because the oﬁences are nearly the same, though not identieai, and it would be oppressive if the aggregate punishment exceeds the maximum punishment for them. 14.11. In this connection, we may also refer to the important Supreme Court case State of Bombay v. S. L. Aptei '. The charge in that case was under section 405 , I.P.C.4 and s_.- 105, Insurance Act . The Court regarded the two offences as distinct. The analysis by the may be quoted--- "(1) Whereas under section 405 of the Indian Penal Code the accused must he 'on- trusted' with property or with "dominion over that property", underjsectim:-105, of the Insurance Act the entrustrnent of dominion over property is urmecessagy; it is suﬁicient if the manager, director etc- "obtains possession" of the (2) The oﬁence of criminal breach of trust { section 405 of the Indian Penal Code) is not committed unless the act of misappropriation or conversion or "the in violation of the law or contract", is done with a dishonest intention; but section 105 of the Insurance Act postulates no intention, and punishes as an oﬂerrce the more withholding of the property----wha_tever be the intent with which the pain: is done; and the act of application of the property of an insurer to purposes other than those authorised by the Act is similarly punishable without reference to any intent with which application or rnisapplication is made. In these,ci,r_::um-- stances, it does not seem possible to say that the offence of crirninitl of trust under the Indian Penal Code is the "same offence" for which; the rigou- dents were prosecuted on the complaint of the company "charging themwith an offence under section 105 of the Insurance Act." I. This does not rule out separate heads of charges, for clarity. 2. See discussion in Purnnmai 1:. Store of Orin-a,'A.I.R. 1958 S.C. 3-36. 3. Stars of Bombay. v. S.L. Apre, A.I.R. 196138.-C. 578, 58l,"parI.[l3. 4. Section 405, l.P.C.--Criminal breach of trust. 93 14,12. There is another Supreme Court case, Roshan Lat v. State of Pun}'ab,* which is relevant to this point. When a person causes the evidence of the two oﬁences under sections S,,c,,,,,,"'j'§§3' 330 and 348, Penal Code to disappear, by burning the body of a person alleged to have been and 345;1«P-C- tortured, does he commit two separate oﬁences under section 201 of that Code ? This was the iv question dealt with by the Supreme Court, which held : I "Now, by the same act, namely burning of the dead body of Raja Ram, the appellant causes the evidence of two offences to disappear. "Taking a strict view of the matter, it must be said that by the same act the appellants committed the offences under section 201. The case is not covered either by section 71 of the Indian Penal Code or by section 26 of the General Clauses sections. But, normally, no court should award two separate punishments for Act, and the punishment for the two oﬁences cannot be limited under those the same act constituting two oﬁences under section 201. The appropriate sentence under section 201 for causing the evidence of the oﬂences under section ' ._ 330 to disappear should be passed, and no separate sentence need be passed i " 33* under section 201 for causing the evidence of the offence under section 3 ,48 to I disappear." ' This case emphasises the aspect of oppression- 14.13. The absence of the requirement of "same offence" is illustrated by a Mysore case, Gandigf v. State of Mysore? The appellant in both the appeals was the same person. He had Mygorg ¢..,._ "been j_ victed under section 161 , Indian Penal Code of having accepted a bribe of Rs. 250,f~ i°l§l"'£n'ﬁ1» l and se enced to ﬁne and iniprisonrnent. He was' also {at a subsequent trial] tried for the offence ,.',._-,'¢i.;.n 5, ofcriniinal misconduct as deﬁned in section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 and P°1"'1'C°d'- convicted under section 5 of the Act, and sentenced to fine and irnprisoninent The Special Judge ad ordered that the sentence, of imprisonment on the second conviction should run con- curren {y with the earlier. This was an appeal against this conviction and sentence. .. . . _ It was urged by counsel for the appellant that since the accused was convicted under section 161 , I.P.C. for the acceptance of the bribe of Rs. 250}, he could not again be convic- -rta. ted or section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act. Reliance was placed in support of this at ent on section 26 of the General Clauses Act and on '.Article 20(2) of the Constitu- tion. - e argument was rejected, and it was held by the Mysore High Court that the "prohi- bition is not against punishment more than once, for different oﬁences". In that connection, ' the court added : 'The offence punishable under section 161 of the Indian Penal Code is different trom the : offence of criminal misconduct punishable under section 5(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act, l - though it may be that some of the ingrediertrs of these two oﬂences are common". Following a Supreme Court case,' the High Court held that the offence created by section 5 of the Prevention of Corruption Act was "an olfence unknown to any of the provisions of the Indian ;Pena1 Code dealing with bribery or corruption." Therefore, the offence under section 5 (1](d) was quite distinct from the offence under section 161, I-P.C. And, since they were dis- tinct oﬁences, section 26 of the General Clauses Act, was held not to apply- i 011 this reasoning, conviction under s. 5 was upheld. 1. Roshan La! v. State afPrmjab, A.I.R. 1965 3.13. 1413, para. l5. 2.. Gandhi. V. State ofilrfysore, A.I.R. 1950 Mys. lll (D.B.). 3. Venkataramun v. The State, A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 107. A case of simultaneous prosecution. Object of amendment. Conclusion and recommendation. 94 14-14. It may be pointed out that this Mysore case would fall within the second category' of offences which, being not the some but being distinct, could be punished separately. In-this case, for the conviction under section 161, LP.-C. (which provides for imprisonment of either description upto 3 years or ﬁne or both), the accused had been sentenced to one year's:r_Ip- rous imprisonment and a ﬁne of Rs. 5,000}. On the conviction under section 5(2) -o£- nip Prevention of Corruption Act (which provides for imprisonment of upto 7 years and fine), he' had been sentenced to one years rigorous imprisonment and a ﬁne of Rs. 75,DOUf--. Thereﬁore, the aggregate did not exceed the punishment that could be awarded for any one of such _ oﬁences. 14.15. In Baliah V. Rangacitarir' the Supreme Court was concerned with simultaneous prosecution. The precise question was whether the appellant could be prosecuted both under section 177 , Indian Penal Code {False information to public servant) and section 52 of the Income Tax Act," 1922 (which was in force at the material time) at the some time. It was argued on behalf of the appellant that in view of the provisions of section 26 of the Gmeral Clauses Act, the appellant could be prosecuted either under section 52 of the 1922 Act, or under section 1 ?7, Indian Penal Code , but not under both the sections at the some time. The court was unable to accept this argument as correct. After quoting section 26 , the Court" observed : "A plain reading of the section shows that there is no bar to the trial or conviction of the offender under both enactments, but there is only a bar to the punishment of the offender twice for the same oﬁence. In other words, the section provides that where an act or omission constitutes an offence under two enactments, the offender may be prosecuted and punished under either or both the enaetngents but shall not be liable to be punished twice for the same offence. We accord- inglv reject the argument of the appellant on this aspect of the case." 14.16. The amendment which we propose to recommend in section 26 is intended to clarify the position on the important points discussed above. As already stated,' it is desir- able to deal separately with two situatlons--ﬁrst where the ingredients of the two oﬁenoes are the same, and secondly where. the ingredients are not identical. 14.17. In conclusion, we wish to add that we have given serious consideration to the problems posed by the present form and language of section 26 , and have decided to recormnend an amendment with a view to avoiding ambiguity or obscurity and making the position in respect of oﬁences falling under the two situations to which we have referred. The anﬁnd-._ ment will, we hope, advance the cause of justice by ensuring that even if the case falls under the second situation, there will be a safeguard against oppression. In the light of the above discussion, we recommend that section 26 should be revised as under: Revised section 26 (1) Where an act or omission is made punishable under two or more enaetment_I,§ the uoﬁender shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (2),5 be liable to be punished one, but not under more than one, of those enactments. - 1. Para. 14.7 and 14.3 supra. 2. Baliah v. Raugachari, A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 101, 706, para. 6. 3. Section 52 , Income Tax Act, 1922---Fa1se veriﬁcation in a statement of income. 4. Paras. 14.7 to 14.9 supra. '- 5. In the alternative, the words "and the oﬁeuces are not distinct" could be used in'sub-5'=?t1'0n f 1) instead of 31% words "subject to the provisions of subsection (2 ". ' *5 V1 '. 95 (2) Where fa) an act or omission constitutes an offence under one enactment, and (b) the same act or omission, in conitmction with any other ingredient or ingredients, constitutes an offence under any other enactment or enactments, then the offender may be prosecuted and punished for each of such offences, but the aggregate of the puntlrhments shall not exceed the punishment which could have been awarded for the most serious of the oﬂences. ?.-\- CHAPTER 15 MISCELLANEOUS Iulroductorr 15.1 The last 6 sections of the Act.-- Sections 25 to 3D----contain miscellaneous prorvisions._ - Some of these--e.g. sections 26 and 27- -are, however, of frequent application, and therefore, I of suﬂicient practical interest. 15.2. Section 25 provides for the recovery of ﬁnes. The section refers, inter aiia, to sections 63--7O of the Indian Penal Code . The Law Commission, in its Report on the Indim Penal Code,1 considered these sections of the Code. The recommendations of the Law Commimicn regarding these sections do not, however, require any substantial change in section 25 of III: General Clauses Act . Section 25 . I:ﬁ:"g';§'§'.Ei_" 15.3. The procedure for the recovery of ﬁnes is dealt with in section 386 of the? Criminal Procedure Code of 1898. The Law Commission, in its Report on the Criminal Procedure Code ', has dealt with this section. But the recommendations made in that Report also do not necessi- tate any change in the General Clauses Act . "3 Recorramendation 15.4. The only change required in this section is verbal, namely, in place of reference to 35'°~'-¢°"°ﬂ 35- the old Code of Criminal Procedure , the reference to the current Code should be substituted. 15.5. Section 26 has already been dealt with'. '-1-wgumbwf 156. Section 27 , which relates to service by post, consists of two limbs, dealing respecu- |°<=ﬁ°112'r'- vely with the mode of service and with the time of service. Under the ﬁrst limb of the section, _ for the purposes of an Act authorising or requiring a document to be served by post, service - shall be deemed to he eﬁected by properly addressing, pre.-paying and posting by registered' -'I post a letter containing the document. This deeming provision, of course, applied unless I. diiferent intention appears. But there is no express saving {or cases where the contrary is proved.' Under the second limb of the section, the service shall be deemed to have been eﬁected as . the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post. This deeming provision applies, unless the contrary is proved, and unless a diﬁerent intention appears from :;;;.; -' ' the context. . 2" . section 114 15 .7. Although the presumption under section 27 , General Clauses Act,' can arise only H E"l'3"1°'*"°'~ when the notice is sent by registered post, there may arise a presumption undefsection 114, Evidence Act , when notice is sent by ordinary post." But the presumption so arising is rebut- table. 1. 42nd Report, pages 66-68. _ 2. See now the corresponding provision in the Code of 1974. 1 - 3. 41st Report, Vol. 1, pages 243-245. I 4. Chapter 14, supra. 5. See pare 15.9 infra. 6 7 . para 15.6, supra. . Section 114, illustration Cl'. Evidence Act . 96 ---...=-,»,.i. ._.-_....,_....» -a-vw - 4-~ . .. y_.._.w._... _,_,_ _.__'f. -.-w.a»-.-.- , --ll' -.,. '-. ..... . -1-1 -.-1 . _ ' -'-"no-------', - - - ..---.-.... «._...--g----..»._......-..n. .--. ----- ----»-.- 97 1 2 15.3. Reference should also be made to section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act. 01131! 5 H Eh.' Under that section, the lessor can determine the lease by a notice to quit, and one of the modes ggc1'[)n'[{ﬁ~ir_;i;3{- ] -- of service of such notice is sending it by post to the party intended to be bound by it- There T-P-5 are similar provisions in certain other Central Act. 15.9. Now, it is obvious that though the ﬁrst limb of section 27 of the General Clauses Act is not expressed to be subject to proof to the contrary,' it is intended to be so. It is not as - i1 evidence in rebuttal of the presumption given in the section could be given only as to the second limb (the time at which the letter is deemed to have been delivered), and not as to the main presumption of service. Unfortunately. however, the section does not say so; and though it seems to have been assumed in a decided case,' it is desirable to make the section, in its _;' ﬁrs! limb, subject to proof to the contrary. , 15.10. If {as is suggested above], the deeming provision in section 27 is subject to evi- $Jti§tf't=g"§Js1e1¢"' dance to the contrary in both cases,' it would also be desirable to replace the words "deemed" n1.-,w.;..-as "shag by the usual formula "shall be presumed". That formula is more appropriate for indicating iiepreumned." a that the presumption is rcbuttable. "':";i" F 15.11. Controversies also arise as to whether proof of this or that fact is suﬂicient to rebut Ca.-sclawasto the presumption under section 27 . Some of the cases relating to the rebuttal of the presu1np- ﬁwﬁeﬁrwf tion are noted in the footnote.' It may not, however, be convenient to lay down any detailed rules in this regard. - 15.12. It seems to have assumed that section 2 '1' applies to statutory instruments. This (ii3_F-ewlnmrn :-; danontoeover .j instruments. _ presumption referred to in section 27 of the General Clauses Act or in section 114, illustration E . (fl, Evidence Act , or both? On this point, there seems to be a conflict of decisions. I . One view is that the presumption under section 114. Evidence Act can be drawn," in case qfgrefusal by the addressee. -it T Another view that even section 27 , General Clauses Act, applies in such case.' The third view is that neither section 114 nor section 27 applies." The ease-law is reviewed in a Madras case,' and in a Calcutta case." - 1. Sec, para 15.6, supra. _ 2. Jcmkiram Nafdu v. Arunugira (1970) 1 M.L.I. 535, 538. 3. Sec. para 15.9, supra. 4. Cf. sections 3 and 4 , Evidence Act. -' x 5. (9.) Sarkar Estates Pvt. Ltd. v. P'.K. Iron works Ltd. A.I.I-1. 1961 Cal. 439, 442, para 3-4 (Refusal to accept) (b) Sukumar v. Na:-ssh Cﬁamfra, A.I.R. 1968 Cal. 49; (c) (1970) All LJ. 455. 6. Garza Ram v. Dhuiwari, A.I.R. 1970 All. 446, 450, 451. para 23-25 (and the Calcutta, Punjab and Madras cases cited therein). 1 7. (a) Dwarka Singh v. Koran SE1-13.1: (1969) All LJ. 549; 7 (13) Bachalal v. Lacbmcm, A.I.R. 1938 A11. 333. 3. 13.} Vamwr Wrﬁai V. Khandzrao, A.1'.R. 1935 Born. 247; (lb) Jankfram v. Damadar. A.I.R. 1956 Nag. 266. 9. B'app;:_}'y.::r V. Venkatarahan, A.]'.R. 1953 Mad. B34, 837. para 9 to 13 (Rajamannar CJ. and Venlratarama Airar J.) 10. N1'rmn{Ba1'a v. Provo: Kumar, (1943) 52 C.V'\'.N. 619 'V-I-Ice 'VI- ....-.. shield be expressly provided for. - an mum." E-_E _ " E 15.13. When a registered letter is refused by the. addressee, is it permissible to draw the $'3x§"£f'-531"' I "aim:-any-use:-u-in-u-vs-.. V Reconnnendation to remove oonﬂict. Section 28(1) . Section 29 . 98 1514. It is obviously desirable that this conﬂict should be resolved. The presumption under section 114 , Evidence Act, should, in our view, continue to be permissible; but, section 27 , General Clauses Act, should not apply in, case of refusal by the addressee. It is better to leave the court free to draw or no-t to draw the presumption, where the letter has been re- fused. For the above purpose we recommend an amendment of section 27 as follows 1- Revised section 27 27(1) . Where any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act or any statutory instrument made thereunder authorises or requires any document to be served by post, whether the expression "serve" or either of the expressions "give" or "send" or anyiothor expression is used, then, unless a different intention appears, and unless the contrary is proved, the service shall be deemed-- ' ' (a) to be effected by properly addressing, pre-paying and posting by registered post, 3 letter containing the document, and . (hi to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post. (2) "Nothing in sub--secrion (1) shall apply to a letter, which the addressee has rbfuﬂ to accept but in such cases it shall be open to the Court to draw or not to draw any such presump- tion as it may think fit to draw under Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, having regard to the circumstances of the case." 15.15. Under section 28(1) , "in any Central Act or Regulation, and in any rule, bye-law, instrument or document, made under, or with reference to, any such Act or Regulation", any actment may be cited [toy reference to the title or short title (if any) conferred thereon or by' reference to the number and year thereof. There is also a provision as to citation of a provision of an enactment. The sub--section can be usefully extended to statutory instruments. For the above purpose, we recommend that section 28(1) should be revised as below- Revised section 28(1) "{1} In any Central Act or Regulation, and in any statutory instrument, or document. made under. or with reference to, any such Act or Regu1ation-- any enactment may be cited by reference to the title or short title (if any) conferred (ail Lhreon or by reference to the number and year thereof. and (h) section of the enactment in which the provision is contained." 15.16. Section 29 contains savings for previous enactments, rules and bye-laws. It needs no change. - -v----q-----o--u--~-u-Iu-------1.-~-------»..r . ---- ----- -- -7 any provision in an enactment may be cited by reference to the section or sub--_ if-......,.... ... ' 99 15.11 We remmmend the insertion of a new section to provide that the provisions of this ggggon 295 Act (as amended respecting the construction of new Central Acts etc.) shall not affect the Swmyfm. construction of existing Central Acts. It will be on the following lines :--- ;=|1111t:'-'E9133 ame Section 29 .4 (New) 29A. The provisions of this Act respecting the construction of Central Acts or Regulation made on or afterthe . . . . . . . . . . ..day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..1 shalt not affect the construction madebefm-3 of any Central Act or Regulation made before that date, although the Central Act or Regulation Bmﬁﬂdmﬂlt is continued or amended by any Central Act or Regulation made on or after that date. 15.13. Section 30 provides that the expression "Central Act", wherever it occurs in this Section 30 . Act, shall be deemed to include an Ordinance made and promulgated by the President. _ An exception is made in respect of section 5 of the Act (which deals with commencement). In addition to this. an exception for the new section which we are recommending" regarding the expiry of temporary Acts, is required". Section 30 also provides that the word "Act" in certain speciﬁed provisions, includes the Ordinances referred to above. No change appears to be required in this part of the section. In the light of the above discussion we recommend that section 30 should be amended as under'*:---- Section 30 In section 30 of the principal Act, after the word and ﬁgure " section 5 ", the words, ﬁgure andjetter "and section 8 " shall be inserted." We would like to place on record our warm appreciation of the valuable assistance we have received from Mr. Bakshi, Member-Secretary of the Commission in the preparation of this Report. P. B. Gajentlragadlrar Chairman P. K. Tripatlii Member E S. S. -Dhavan _ Member S. P. Sen-Vanna Member P' M' Bakshi Member-Secretarv W..: New Delhi till 20th May. 1974. 1. Date of ooinmenoement er 'a'r|1t:ndmcnt Act to be aunties. ,, E 3. _5eel:ion 3:'\ (new). ' is 3. Sec discussion relathig to section sis, Chapter Tamra. ; '3' LI 4. This is consequential on new section SA. 5. Soctionzrefulenen in-this umantlmnrrt (referring to auto: or in numbering. 15 M of 1..t'l'l'74--14 should be checked up at-, 5, ,, gang, . _r .3 s I -'<I! .....«sa.s.-.- . - - 100 REPORT 03"» GENERAL CLA USES A("" APPENDIX Proposals as shown in the form of draft amendments to the existing Ac:'--'. Nose : This is a tentative draft only. Section. 3, opening lines [ch. 3] in section 3 , before the words, "In this Act", the words, ﬁgure and letter "Subject to the provisions of section 3A", shall be inserted-'*. Reviseci section 3(3) [ch. 3] (3) "aﬂ'idavit" shall mean a statement in writing purporting to be a statement of facts, signed by the person marking it and conﬁrmed by him by oath." ' ' (SA) "aircraft" shall mean any rnacliine which can derive support in the atmospnerefrom I reactions of the air, and shall include balloons, whether fixed or free, oirships, kites, glitters ﬂying machines. l ' Section 3(1DA) (Now) i r Ich. 3] After clause (10), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely :--. "(10A) 'clause' shall mean.------ (a) a subdivision of the sub-section in which the word occurs, or (b] where there is no sub-section in the section, a subdivision of the section in which the word occurs. Revised section 3(11) , lich. 31 3(ll) "Collector" shall mean........ .the chief oﬁicer-in-charge of the revonlﬁ = administration of a district, anal shall include the Collector of Calcutta, Madras or Bombay: Revised section 3 ( 16) _ [ch 31 3:116) "Consular Uﬂicer" shall mean any person entrusted with the exercise of functions, irrespective of his designation and shall include Consul General, Consul. Vice Consul and Consular Agent : Section 3(16A) (New) - ~ [ch. 3] (IGA) "ciaugliter", in the ease of any one whose personal law permits adoption, Slllisilliilielﬁﬁ an adopted daughter': 3""'°" 3l_§§3).,"'lE"') ' . .. , , (16B) "day" shall mean a period of lzpurs l I "'" . .. . . -. .. . .' . ' Lia) The amendments tegasdmg deﬁnitions will apply to_ existing _Ac_ts, unleis ot|!t.:l'wia£'in§lr;II|:odl; - In tliecaseofa few deﬁnitions intendedto be prospective only, 1t_1s nooessosy to 1ns_ert_ g = . new section to indicate that they are prospective. 'Si-.e'pe1'oposed section l (b) As regards amendments in provisions, other than d;eljniti,ons,Ithe,_a,mendnyp111s will an-ply_ to ' - Acts, unless othersise indicated. " ' ' ' ' ' - ' 2. The refg:j.r_enoe_ in the margin in.;ec_t_a.;;gu1ar bgackztn indicate the religion! engage; in the 1:39;; . _- l 3. See"newséctio1i_'3A. ' I 4 .. -- ' ' ' '"- 4. This amendment should not apply to existing Acts. See section 3A (proposed). :: 101 Section 3 ( 16C) (-New) (MC) "a'iplomatic oﬁFicer" shall mean a member of the stat? of a diplomatic mission having utiipiomnric rank, and includes an or.-'tbttrsador, high commissioner, envoy', minister and charg- tt'aHai.r.r : Rctfiscd section 3 (I7) (17) . "District Judge" shall mean the Judge of a principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction, (ch, but shall not include -- (a) an Additional Judge of such court, or (b) the High Court in the exercise of its ordinary or extra-ordinary civil jurisdiction. Revised section 3(18) "document" shall include any sitbstancc having any matter written, expressed, irtscribéff I [l_'|1_ described or otherwise rec-orcied upon it by means of letters, ﬁgures or marks or by any other means, or by more than one of these means, which are intended to be used or which may be used for the purpose of recording that matter. Exp-ianation.--tt is immaterial by what means the letters, figures or marks are formed." Reviseti section 3 ( 19) 3(19) "enactnte2nt" shall i'r-tclutie any iaw p:;L:'.'.sctI or made by any lcgis'iaittt'e or other attiit0- [eh. rity acting in a legislative capacity, and shall also include any provision contained in any such law, him shall not include a statutory instrument : Revised section 3 1 ' 25) 3(25) "High Court", used with reference to civil or crirninal proceedings, shall mean thetch. High Court or the Court of Jtniicial Commisioner having jurisdiction over the part of India in which the Act or Regulation containing the expression operates ;" Revised section 3 {.3 1) 3(3I) "local authority" shall mean a mmticipai corporation or committee, a district board, gm a. Cantonment board or a body of port commissioners, or any other authority constituted for the 'put'p0Be of local self-g-overnment or village administration ; Section 3 (35}--~--deﬁnition of 'month' In section 3 (35J, for the word "British", the word "Gregorian" shall be substituted. Revised section H37) '13?) 'oath' snail mean an oath taken before a competent autiioriry with reference to ri1e[¢h_ Oatttnldct, 1969, or any other law for the time being in force, and shall, in the case of persons by law allowed to affirm or declare instead of swearing; include afﬁnnation or declaration marie before a competent authority with reference to that Act or law. Section 3(43A) (New) 3i(4-3-A) "prescribed" shall mean prescribed by ruies made under the Central Act or Rega- [ch lotion in which the word occurs; Section 3(47A) (New) 3g_{4"t'A)'-'public" snail include any class or section of the public,'- 15-H .[.awi'i4--15 lch. 3| 3 I 3| 3] 3] 3] 102 Section 3(60A) (New) 3(60A) "statutor_v instrument" shall mean a rate, notiﬁcation, bye-law, order, scheme, [ch. 3] _ form or other instrument made under an enactment ; Section 3(62A) ( New) [ch 3] 3(62A) "temporary Act" or "teniporar}' Regulation" shall mean a Central Act or Regula- _ tion, whether made before or after the commencement of the Constitution, which is to cease to have effect or cease to operate on a particular clay or on the expiration of a particular period or on the happening of a particular event; ' [Existing section 3 {62A) to be renumbered as section 3 { 62)] A Revised' section 3 {66) lch. 3| 3066) "year" shall mean a year reckoned according to the Gregorian calendar. Section 3A (New) 3A. The deﬁnitions in section 3 of the following words and expressions, that is to Mar,' 1 ti) "daughter", It do not apply to---- (a) this Act so far as it reiates to the period before the ............. ..day" of ............. .. 01' lb) to any Central Act or Regulation made before the . . . . . . . . . . ..day" of . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . ., 1974. Section 4B (New) [ch. 31 After section 4A, the following section shall be inserted, name1}":-- "4B.- in every Central Act or Regulation, made on or after . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..day of....................', where a word is defined, ! ' . i l _ ta) the word shall have the meaning assigned by the deﬁnition, unless the context otherwise requires ; - pending meanings, unless the context otherwise requires. Revised section 55 (i) in the case of a Central Act made before the commencement of the ' on the day on which it receives the assent of the Govemor-General: of the President. - List to be given. . Date of commencement of amended Act to be entered. . Date of commencement of amending Act to be entered. 7 -3'--L.al~.J\--I' S l I I i _ Date of commencement of amending Act. . The revised sub-section (3) will agply to _existing Act also. ' Ur (b) grammatical variations of that word and its cognate expressions shall have corres- lch. 31 _ , , Comin into "S. (1) Where any Central Act 13 not expressed to «come into force on a particular _day._ f:n";,2nﬂj"_ then it shall come into torce----- T :5' * (ii) in the case of an Act. of Parliament, on the day on which it receives 'the gr.-..-.---m.-m ..»w--.....__ "__W_ ,. .. E us 103 "(ll Where an Ordinance promulgated or Regulation made by the President on 0? ﬂlfﬁf the . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..,1 is not expressed to come into force on a particular day, then it shall come into force on the day on which the Ordinance is promulgated or the Regulation is made, as the case may be. _ , (31 Unless the contrary intention is expressed, every Central Act, Ordinance, or'Regulation or provision thereof shall be construed as coming into force immediately on expiration of the d.a,y.. preceding the beginning of the day on which it comes into force. . 1,4) The date appearing on the copy of a Central Act printed by or under the authority of the Central Government innnediately after its title shall be evidence that such date is the date on which the Governor-General or the President, as the case may he. gave his assent." Section 5- -A (New) .3-A. The marginal note appended to any provision of any Central Act or Regulation, and reference to the number and year of any foriner law in the margin against any such provision,-- ( a) shall form no part of the said Central Act or Regulation, as the case may be; (13) shall be deemed to have been inserted for the sake of convenience only; and (c) may be corrected or amended under the authority of Government. Section 53 (Now) The headings of the Parts or Chapters into which any Central Act or Regulation is dibéded shall be deemed to IE; part of the Act or Regulation, as the case may be. Revised Section 6A , Where any Central Act or Regulation (other than _a temporary Act or Regulation) amends text of any Central Act or Regulation by the express omission, insertion or substitution of matter, and the amending Central Act or. Regulation is subsequently repealed. then, unless If iﬁerent intention appears, the repeal shall not aﬁect the continuance of any such amendment by the Central Act or Regulation so repealed and in operation at the time of such repeal. Section 63 (Now) After section 6A of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namcly,"---- "IJB. Where the short title of any enactment, being a Central Act or Regulation, is aniended, then, reference to that Central Act or Regulation by its old title in any other enact- ment or any statutory instrument shall, unless a diﬂerent intention appears, be construed as rcjkrences to it with its new title." Section 8(1) should be revised, and section 8 (I-A)" inserted, as follows :-- '_ "3('l) Where this Act, or any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement ofithis Act, rcpcals and re-enacts, with or without modiﬁcation, any provision of a former enact- tnint, than references in any other enactment or in any statutory instrument to the provision I . Date of comrnmccrncnt of amendment Act to be entered. 2. This new section can apply to existing Acts. lCh. 5] Marginal note not part of enactments. [ch. .5] I-[eadin 5 part 0 cnactmcnfs. [Cl_!- 5} Rcpealoflaw makingjtpxtual amendmcuts in -ft . othcrlm. : [ch. 6] Refereacc to < AF! Etc; t. -w thshpﬁ ' Litlic ameiudcd. V ' {Ci}. 1'] Efiect of expiry of iempurnry Act.' [Ch. 7]. Time of expiry of temporary Acts etc. ' [cu 8 J ; Expressions in time. - 194 so repealed, or to the provnion of any former enactnient repealed and re--enacred' by the provision so repealed, shall, unless a diﬂerent intention appears, be construed as references to the provision so re--cnacted. (1-A) Where any statutory instrument rescinds and re-incorporates, with or without mada7- E ﬁcurion, any provision of a former statutory instrument, than references in any enactment or in T ' any other statutory instrument to the provision so rescinded, or to the provision of any forrntr statutory instrunien: rescinded and re--t'ncorporated by the provision so rescinded, shall, unis: a rlr'ﬂ'emr! intention appears, be construed as references to the provision so re-incorporated." Section 8-A (New) {i--A. Where a temporary Central Act or a temporary Regulation made on or after the . . . . . . . . . . . . .day of . . . . . . . . . . . expires,' then, in the absence of an express provision to the contrary, the expiry shall not aﬁcct----- (a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suifercd, under the temporary Act or Regulation ; - (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under the temporary Act or Regulation ; i (C) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment -incurred under the temporary Act or Regu- lation ; or ',:_ J: _. it!) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right. privilege, t'? obligation, liability, penahy, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, forfeitureuor punishment may be imposed, as if the temporary 3 Act or Regulation had not expired. Section 8-3 (New) 853. Where a Central Act or Regulation made on or after the . . . . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . express:-.d=_ to expire, lapse or otherwise cease to havﬁc client on a particular day, then it shall, unless the contrary intention is expressed, be construed ceasing to have effect immediately on the expiration of the day immediately preceding that day. Revised Section 9 9 (]) In an»; Central Act or Regulation made on or after the commencement of Act orin any statutory instrument made ihereunder, it 511311 be 5"fﬁ°i"'-""t"' ' ' :.I (21) to use the ward "from-s 0,. mg ward "after" for the purpose of excluclnigeﬁfgi ﬁrst in a series of days ; - - ~ (13) to use the word -'-to",fo1- the purpose of including the last in a scries 5, days , . -. s - : ,-._ Ana": 1. Date of L201'n1'|1€nCE]T|.€l.'!'. of an-iendirlﬂ A" 'C' be 'n5°"'°d' 2 Dam of co ,1 nu-.: mm of afnsnding Act to be inserted. in--v -1.'§-\.4§:,','_',,,|,",,, am.»- ..3L 105 _ (IA) In any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the ............................... .. day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .197 ,1 or in any statutory instrument made thereunder. it shall be sutﬁct'ent--- (a) to use the word "'on" for the purpose of including The 6551)' 0H which 61 P¢'"'0d is expressed to begin ; e (In) to use the word "with" for the purpose of including the day on which a period is expressed to end ; ' (c) in relation to the interval between two events---- (i] to use the words "clear days" or the words "at least" or "not less than" a speciﬁed number of days, for the purpose of excluding the days on the events happen ; and V "T- (ii) merely to specify the number of days for the purpose of excluding the clay on which the ﬁrs! event happens and including the day on which the second event happens. (IB). Where in any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the. . . . .'.' . . .._.. day of 3 or in any statutory instrument made under any such Central Act or Regulation, a period from a speciﬁed day to a speciﬁed day is referred to, followed by the words "n'Joth' days inclusive". the period shall include both the days. (2) Subsection (1) applies also to all Central Acts made after the third day of January, 1865, and to all Regulations made on or after the fourteenth day of January. 1887, and to etat:n'ar_v instruments made under such Central Acts or Regulation. Revised section 10 S ' i19(1). Where, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of i:!ilaA.{c]1, 3] Aﬁ.§'ﬂr by any statutory instrument made under any such Central Act or Regulation, any act proceeding is directed or allowed to be done or taken in any Court or ofﬁoe on a cettﬁn day or within a speciﬁed period, then, if the Court or oﬂicc is closed on that day at all the last day of the speciﬁed period, the act or proceeding shall be considered as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken on the next day afterwards on which the Court or oiﬁcc is open : : ' ' ' Ltmtiartan Act, 1953, applies. K2). This section applies also to all Central Acts and Rcgulatwns madeon or after. fourteenth day of January, 1887 and to statutory lnitrumonts made under sach Central tiers" or Regulations. _ -1. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be entered. 2.. Date of commencement of amending Act to be inserted. 15 M of Law,t'74---1-I5 i . . - 1 I ' \ .' i t -. n, -..-,._.....i__.....s___... . ... ._ ._... . ...-___'je. rovided that nothing in this section shall apply to any act or proceeding to which. thp. * 4;; _-_ﬁ_: 1 ''21-' I! [Ch. 8]. ltcterence to Incorporation. tea. at Oifences by COﬂ'I|D3Dl¢I. 105 Section 10A (New) After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely :-- "IDA. Where in any Central Act or Regularion made on or after the . . . . . . . . . . . . L. day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..197 ,1 any reference to a speciﬁed time of the day occurs, then such time shall', unless it is otherwise speciﬁcally stared, mean the Indum Standard Tirne." ' Revised section 13 (I) In every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires, worm importing the masculine gender shall include females. ; (2). In every Central Act or Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires, words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the singular. .5'ection_l3A (New) T __; "l3A_. Where, by or under any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the . . . . . . ................... .. day of any association or body of persons is consrinated a body corporate, then, unless a dzﬂerenr intention appears, that body corporate--- (a) shall have perpetual succession, and a common seal with. power to alter or change tl1e~seal: T {-bl). may sueiand he sued by its corporate name; T . 1 (c) shall have power------ I - . {i} to Conn-acI'b;P its corporate narne ; '(ii) to acquire, hold or dispose of property, whether movable or immovable." . Section 13AA (New) (1') If the person committing an oﬁence under any Central Act or Regulation mntI_e_ on or after the . . . . . . . . . . . . ..day of . . . . . . . . . . . . . .' is a company, then, unless a diiferelr intention appears, the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conductof its business at the time of the commission of the oﬁenbe shall be deemed' to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to he proceeded against and punished- accordingly. Provided that nothing contained in this subsection shall render any such person liable . "to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his lcnowlodge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such oﬁence. (2) Where an oﬁenoe under such Act__ or Regulation has been committed by a company, then, unless a different intention appears, any director, manager, secretary or other o_' r 'T i the company, not being a person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the com! _ - at' its business at the time of' the commission of the oﬁence shall, if it isiproved that the has been committed with his consent or connivanoe or that the commission of the oEenc§- is attributable to anyiueglect on his part, bedeemed to be guilty of that offence-and @ll liable to he proceeded against and punished accordingly. H l. Date of commencement of the amending Act to be terod. 2. Date of oomrncnocment of antcndrnmt A ct to beenlcred. 3_ gate of commencement of amending Act to inserted. 107 Section l3AA (New) Contrt. Explanation.--For the purposes of this section.--- it (3) "con-lpan\Ir!' means any body corporate and includes a ﬁrmior other persons, and ' . Ifb) "director", in relation to a form, means a partner in the ﬁrm. Section 1311 (New) "13B. In the absence of an express provision to the contrary, every Central Act or Regulaa 10]. t tion made on or after the ................... ..day of ................... ..197 1, shall be binding on the to be ! Government." i'°""'- I _ Section 13C (New) , _ I :_ ' ' I _ _.'. I 13C. In the absence of an express provision to the contrary, a debt due to the Government [Ch. 101§_'__ 'vF\_'_ under any Central Act or Regulation made on or after the ............. "day of" ........ ..- ...... . . . . . . . . ., shall have priority over other debts not secured by a mortgage or charge, if the debt is in the nature of a tax or free, but not otherwise." it i Revised section 14 . '- ,5 I4. (1) "There, by any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement oi'-*tl'Ii§7[¢h_ 111 Act or by any statutory instrument made thereunder, any power is oonferred or any duty imposed, then, unless a different intention appears, that power may he exercise, and that duty shall be performed from time to time as occasion requires. . . i 7-"{2} This section applies also to all Central Acts and Regulations made on or after the 'i fourtcenth day of January, 1887, and to statutory instruments made thereunder. l Revised section 15 15. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, or lay any statutory instrument 'made ther¢- {ch 11-1. 5 under, a power' to appoint any person to ﬁll any oﬁice or execute any function is conferred. 1 7 then, unless it 1:; otherwise expressly provided, any such appointment, if it is' made after the commencement of this Act. may he made either by name or by virtue of oiﬁce. Revised section 17(1) . e-.5117. (1) In any Central Act or Regulation made after the commencement. of this Act. it slﬂlljsbe sulﬁciant, for the purpose of indicating the application of a law" to every person or notiﬁer of persons for the time being executing the functions of an oﬂiee, to"-mention the oﬁigl title of the oﬁicer executing the functions, ai the time when the Central Act or Regulation * is made, orethat of the oﬂicer by whom the functions are commonly executed. {ch 111 Section 18A (New) IBA. Where, under any Central Act or Reputation made on or after the . . . . . . . . . .. day [Ch 11] of.-., . .- . . . . . . . . .3, or under any statutory instrument made thereunder,--- ' ' an) the exercise of a power or discitarge o_f,a function.i;jt a_ person 0;.-, gosh the opinion, belief or state of mind of that person or authoritviin relation to anai 1. Date of commencement of amendment Act to be entred. 2. Date of commencement of amending Act to be entered. 3. Date of Amendment Act to be entered. ~g,,.___..._.'....-.._....._..... - . lch. 1!) Deviation from farm (New). [ch.I31_ Construction of llal.'I'l'D0!'}_{ lustmmcnti. [ch. 12] Ich. 11] Making" of (B. '23[1l and 5.111(3)}- 108 (13) that power or function has been delegated in pursuance of such Act or Regulation or statutory instrument. then, save as is otherwise expressly provided by such Act or Regulation or statutory instrument, the power or function may be exercised or discharged by the delegate upon the opinion, belief or state of mind of the delegate in relation to that matter. Section 19A (New) "19A. Whenever a form is prescribed or speciﬁed for any act by any Central Act or Regga- lation, or by any statutory instrument made thereunder, then, save as is otherwise expresﬂj provided by such Central Act or Regulation or by such statutory instrument, anv deviations there} from neither affecting the substance nor calculated to mislead. shall not render the acttor fan: irtvalid} Revised section 20 \ 20. Expressions used in a statutory instrument made under a Central Act or Regulation shall. unless the context of the statutory instrument otherwise requires, have the same respective -meanings as in the Act or Regulation. Revised section 21 E 7 ;. 21. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation, a power to make a statutory instrurnentlib conferred, them, unless the context otherwise requires, that power includes a power, exercisable , in the like manner and subject to the and conditions {if any), to add to, amend, vary or rescind the statutory instrument so made. "22. Where, by any Central Act or Regulation which is not to come into force immediately Revised section 22 on the passing or making thereof, a power is conferred--~ (a) to make a statutory instrument, or (b) to issue orders with respect to--- (i) the application of the Act, or Regulation. . . ., (ii) the establishment of any court or oﬁce, or (iii) the appointment of any Judge at oﬁicer thereunder, or (iv) the person by whom or the time when, or the place where, or the manner or the fees for which, anythiirg is to be done under the Act or _ that power may be exc'rcimd- at any time after the passing of the Act or 23. Where .. . . any Central Act on Rognldtlon confers on any authority powerito a statutory instrument subject to the of the statutory instrumetit being previous publication, then the 'fol1owing'p1'oviﬁcns shall apply, namely :-- the Regulation, cﬁcct till the common but statutory instruments or orders so mark: or issued shallfncttﬂ cement o£_ the Act or Regulation, or, mime all provisiairs' of Act or Regulation do not come into force at the same time. then tilt tile caIr1i1IuIIIu- men: of the relevant provision. Revised section 23 5. '~ r (a) the authority . . . . . .. sliall first publish a draft of the proposed instrument for I information of persons likely to be aﬁcctoclt thereby, together with a notice specifying the date or after which the draft will be taken into consideration ; 1. New section 19A can apply tcfexisting Acts also. .,, 17 I : r:W".;'Fi ' 109 . . - . ' ' (.23(2)}. (b) the publication shall be made in such manner as the authority deems to be suﬂictent, ! or, if the empowering provision in the Act or Regulation so requires. 511 511°}! 111311951" as 'h' Gmelmnent concerned directs; (c) . . . . . . . any objection or suggestion . . . . . received by the authority . . . . from any (,_23(4)). person with respect to the draft before the date speciﬁed in the notice shall be considered by it, and, where the statutory instrument is to be made with the sanction, approval or concurrence of _ authority, also by that authority, before the instrument is finally made; ._....--_.. , ._ ..._,'..' {6} the publication in the official ganette-. of a statutory instrument purporting to have been made after previous publication in exercise of a power to make such statutory instrument shall be conclusive proof that the statutory instrument has been made in comphanoe with the provisions of this section. Section 23A (New) Publication and commencement of rules, bye-laws and general orders i"23_A. (1) Every rule made or bye-law approved or general order issued by the Central [ch_ 12] Govéﬁunenr on or after the . . . . .. day of . . . . . . .1 under any Central Act or Regulation---- (:1) shall be published in the official gazette. I3-ml' . ""-'E (b) shall, in the absence of an express provision to the contrary either in the rule or bye--law or general order or in the Central Act or Regulation under which it iomade or approved or issued, come into force on the day on which it is published in the official gazette. 'I T2) No such rule or bye--law or general order shall come into force from a date earlier their; the date on which it is made or approved or issued by the Central Government, unless the Contal Act or Regulation under which it is made or approved or issued expressly confers a power is gave in-such effect. _ Explanation.-----ln this section, the expresion "general order" means an order which affects the public. ' Section 133 (1) Every rule made under any Central Act by the Central Government on or -after [ch 1;] tU_"' . . . . . . . . ..day . . . . . . . . . . ..of...- . . . . . . . ..'~' shall be laid, as soon as may be after R1_I1ﬁi°b'.I it made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 'IIHLVI may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions; and it, before the expiy of the session in which it is so laid or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses in making any modiﬁcation tn the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not bohﬂde, the rule shall thereafter have effect only it such modified form or be of no eﬂect, as thc case may be, so however that any such rnolfiﬁcnrion or annulment shall be without prejuditce to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. (2) Every such modiﬁcation or annulment shall be published in the oﬂicial gazette. " ' Section 24 In section 24 . for the words "notiﬁcation, order, scheme, rule. form or bye-law", wherever they occur, the words "or statutory instrurnent" shall be substituted. [ch. 12} : 1. lhto of commencement ofthc amendment Act to l:oe'entered_ 2. Insert date of commencement of amending Act. Modildtbn-. '-'ti I [ch. 14} ' [-ch. 14] [ch 15] I .'.5.-1,'_-1 I .'\ 5. 1.- [ch. 15] 110 Section 25 In section 25 , for the words1 "the Codeuor Criminal Procedure for the time being in force", the words, and ﬁgures and comma "the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1974'' shall be substituted. Revised section 26 "(1) 'Where an act or omission is made punishobie under two or more enaehnents,'_itln:§ oﬁender shall, subfect to the provisions of sub-section (2) ', be liable to be punished under = one,-but not under more than one, of those enactments. ' e 7 i 1'2) Where--- (a) an act or omission constitutes an oﬂence under one enactment,' and 1 ii (13) the same act or omission, in conjunction with any other ingredient or ingredients, constitutes an offence under any other enactment or enactments, then the offender may be prosecuted and punished for each of such offences, but the aggregate of the' punishments shall not exceed the punishment which could have been awarded for tip, K," j most serious of the offences.' u Revised section 27 2 'i'( 1) "Where any Central Act orkegulation made after the commencement of this Act or zfny sriitutory instrumentmode thereunder authorises or requires any document to be served by post, whether the expression "serve" or either of the expression "give" or "send" or any other expression is used, then, unless a different intention appears, and uniess the contrary is proved, the service shall be de_emed-- - (a) to be effected by properly addi-essing', pre-paying and posting by registered post, letter containing the document, and ' "n$;- 'to have been effected [lat .rexn¢ at 'an; the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post. (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall' appiyio oh.-tier, which the addressee has refused to accept her snch.'cu.res.,it _shaII.be__oper_z _t_o_the_ Court to draw or noI..to.cira14r.-an}'-St¢qiI_*p_rve- 1 _; " prion as it may think fit to draw under section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, having,» ' regaIcl_to the circumstances of the case." _ ' . _ 3, ' = "I ' Revised section 23(1) -- ' 7 - _! 75$ 'fr 1) In any Central Act or Regulation, and in any statutory. instrument-, -or document' mule-:_ - ' under, o'r__with,1'eferencc to, any such Act or Regulation ; ' , : ., , - - V - ' 1 (a) any enactment may be cited by reference to the title or short title (if any] conferred . thereon or by reference to the number and year thereof. and T x (b) any provision in an enactment may be cited by reference to the section CI' sub? section of the enactment in which the provision is contained." __ ._ ,..' .' . .E',: "' ' , .- I--- _ "T --.'.T? J. This can apply to existing Act: also. 2. In the alternative, the words "and the oﬂ'enees_are not distinct" couldbcuscd in sub-mtion (I) instead of the words "subject to the provisions of subsection (2 ." - ' 111 Section. 29A (New) "29. The provisions of this Act respecting the construction of Central Acts or Regatationsggi-in1'51for made on or after rim . . . . . . . . day of . . . . . . . .1 shalt not affect the construction of any Central gnagtmgnm 'ﬁt, Act or Regulation made before that date, aitizoagh the Central Act or Regulation is continued mad' 54°" aincndmem. or amended by any Central Act or Regulation made on or after that date." __ . Section 30 In section 30 cf the principal Act, after the word and ﬁgure " section 5 "', the words, ﬁgure and letter "and section 8 .4" shall be insert.-:d.'.3 _t.. «in.- Date of commencement of amendment Act to bc cntcrcd. I This is consequential on New section 8 A. _-' 3. Suction reference in this amendment (referring to effect of expiry) should be chcckcd up if, than is a E change in numbering. Mr- _.___....~_.--»----- -an -' lvIGIPF.R'ND--~ Is M of 1..wn+.-sac III(Din")--lS---ll---7+--2.0o0