Abu Bakkar Siddique vs The State Of Assam And 2 Ors on 6 December, 2018 Author: Kalyan Rai Surana Bench: Kalyan Rai Surana Page No.# 1/7 GAHC010047712018 THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH) Case No. : Crl.Pet. 198/2018 1:ABU BAKKAR SIDDIQUE S/O- LT HAJI BABURULLA, VILL-NO.2 GARAIMARI, P.O. ALUKHUNDA, P.S. BIJNI, DIST- CHIRANG (BTAD), ASSAM VERSUS 1:THE STATE OF ASSAM AND 2 ORS. REP. BY P.P., ASSAM 2:JOYSHREE WARY ADVOCATE OF BIJNI SDJM COURT W/O- SRI ANJAN BASUMATARY R/O- BIJNI TOWN WARD NO.1 P.S. BIJNI DIST- CHIRANG (BTAD) ASSAM PIN-783390 3:RAHUL ISLAM AKAND S/O- MD. ABDUL MAZID AKAND VILL- NEW BHAITBARI (BABUPARA) P.O. AND P.S. FULBARI DIST- WEST GARO HILLS MEGHALAYA PIN-79410 Advocate for the Petitioner : MR. D A KAIYUM Advocate for the Respondent : PP, ASSAM Page No.# 2/7 BEFORE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA ORDER 06.12.2018 Heard Mr. D. A. Kaiyum, learned counsel for the petitioner as well as Mr. D. Das, learned P.P., Assam, for the State as well as Mr. M. K. Boro, learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 2 and 3. 2. By this application under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the petitioner has prayed for quashing of the charge-sheet No.60/2017 dated 30.06.2017 under Section 341 / 506 IPC. 3. As per the charge-sheet, the investigation of Bijni P.S. Case No.75/2017 under Section 341 / 387 / 506 IPC based on FIR lodged on 03.06.2017 by the respondent No.2 reveals that when the respondent Nos.2 and 3 were proceeding to go to the Court of the District & Sessions Judge, Chirang from the Court of the learned SDJM, Bijni, the petitioner had restrained them in the PWD road in front of the Court of Bijni and rebuked them in slang language and that the petitioner had demanded money from the respondent No.3, which was allegedly due to him and, as such, upon investigation, charge-sheet was submitted against the petitioner under Section 341 / 506 IPC. 4. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in order to realize a sum of Rs.3,20,000/- from the respondent No.3, the petitioner had instituted a money suit, being M.S. 04/2016 and that the FIR by the respondents No.2 and 3 is a counter blast and the same was lodged at 5 p.m. on 03.06.2017, making false and concocted allegations against the petitioner. It is submitted that as per the order dated 03.06.2017 passed by the learned District Judge, Chirang in M.S. 04/2016, it is recorded that the respondent No.3 had submitted some documents, which was kept in the case record. Hence, it is submitted that the allegations in the FIR that about 11:30 am, the petitioner had restrained the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 along with 4, other miscreants was not believable. It is submitted that the recording of the presence of the respondent No.3 before the learned trial court was sufficient to show that there was no restrain by the petitioner and that the respondents No.2 and 3 had appeared before the learned trial Court at Chirang, which would normally take about 45 minutes of travel time. It is stated that the allegations that the petitioner would engage Bodo Page No.# 3/7 extremists for realizing money is an afterthought and false. It is submitted that on the basis of the allegations made in the FIR as well as in the charge-sheet, the chances of conviction was bleak. It is also submitted that even by taking the allegations on its place value, no offence of wrongful restrain within the meaning of Section 339 IPC was made out and, as such, it is submitted that there was no reason to proceed against the petitioner under Section 341 IPC. It is also submitted that charges that were framed under Section 294 IPC which relates to use of obscene acts and songs in a public place, which was not the allegations made in the FIR. It is also submitted that there is nothing in the charge-sheet to show that there was any threat by the petitioner to engage Bodo extremists for demanding money. Hence, it is submitted that the charges that were framed under Sections 341 / 506 IPC is not sustainable as the allegations would not result in conviction of the petitioner under Sections 341 / 506 IPC. 5. In support of the submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the following cases:- (1) Parbatbhai Aahir etc. -Vs.- State of Gujarat and Another, (2017) 9 SCC 641 (paragraph-16). (2) Manik Taneja and Another -Vs.- State of Karnataka and Another (2015) 7 SCC 423 (paragraphs- 11, 12 and 13). (3) Dalbir Singh -Vs.- State of U.P. (2004) 5 SCC 334 (paragraphs-15 and 17). 6. Per contra the learned counsel for the respondents No.2 and 3 submits that the FIR or charge-sheet can only be quashed if the allegations made in the FIR, even if they were taken at their face value in its entirety does not disclose any prima facie offence or make out the case against the accused and in this regard, it is submitted that the allegations made in the FIR fully disclosed incriminating materials against the petitioner under Sections 341 and 506 IPC and therefore, by relying on the case of State of Haryana and Ors. -Vs.- Bhajan Lal and Ors., 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 335 , it is submitted that this is not a case where the respondents No.2 and 3 are trying to abuse the process of the Court and it is submitted Page No.# 4/7 that no case is made out for quashing of the charge-sheet. 7. The learned Addl. P.P., Assam has submitted that the present case being a summons triable case, as such, the learned trial court was only required to explain the offence and it is submitted for the purpose of explaining charges to the petitioner, the trial court is only required to consider the allegations made in the FIR and any other materials which might have been collected at the time of investigation and all these materials together constitute the materials on record which can be used for the purpose of explaining the charges. He further submits that the Indian Penal Code does not prescribe any particular period of time or manner of restraint and therefore, the veracity of complaint can only be adjudicated in the course of trial. 8. The only question to be decided herein is that whether on the basis of materials available before the learned trial court, any prima facie case is made out under Sections 341 / 506 IPC. 9. In this regard, the legal principle appears to be well settled since the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bhajan Lal (supra). Accordingly, this Court is only required to appreciate whether the allegations made in the FIR prima facie discloses commission of any offence against the accused. In other words, the Court in exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is not required to evaluate the veracity of any defence documents, save and except only those documents which are of sterling quality and cannot be disputed in any way as such, this Court can only appreciate what is revealed from the FIR, the charge-sheet or any other materials collected during investigation. The question that when the respondent Nos.2 and 3 had appeared before the Court of the learned District Judge, Chirang on the same date of incident whether it allegedly negates the act of wrongful restrain threatening by the petitioner, would essentially be looking into the defence materials produced by the petitioner. The evaluation of the defence materials produced by the accused appears to be not contemplated within the scope of Section 482 Cr.P.C. Therefore, unless such evidence is of sterling quality, it cannot be held for sure that the appearance of the respondents No.2 and 3 before the Court of District Judge, Chirang is a conclusive proof of any wrongful restraint by the petitioner. Page No.# 5/7 10. In the case of Dalbir Singh (supra), the facts therein was that the said accused was charged under Section 302 IPC for the murder of his wife and two daughters and he was further charged under Section 304-B of the IPC for causing dowry death of his wife and he was also charged under Section 498A of the IPC for subjecting her to cruelty and that during trial, the said accused was convicted under Sections 302 and 498A IPC but he was acquitted of charges under Section 304-B IPC. Therefore, the question before the Court was whether the accused was aware of the basic ingredients for which he was being convicted and it is in that context that the appeal filed by the accused, was dismissed. Therefore, in the opinion of this Court, the ratio laid down in the said case was on different facts and the ratio in the facts of the present case is not found to apply in this application for quashing of the charge-sheet under Section 482 Cr.P.C. In this connection, this Court is of the opinion that the petitioner had been explained about the nature of offence for which he would be tried as required under Section 251 Cr.P.C. 11. In the case of Manik Taneja (supra), based on the posting made in social media in the Bangaluru Traffic Police facebook page, the aggrieved police inspector had lodged an FIR against the accused therein for offences punishable under Sections 353 and 501 IPC and in that context, Hon'ble Apex Court has interpreted that there was no obstruction to the second respondent therein for discharging his public duties. Therefore, the criminal intimidation in said case was in a totally different context and that was not a case where there was a physical restraint to the first informant therein in performing his public duties. However, in the present case, the FIR reveals an allegation of wrongful restraint and there is no criteria laid down as regards the period for which one was restrained would be relevant for determining the offence. Section 339 IPC relates to "whoever voluntarily obstructs" any persons so as to prevent that person from proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed as wrongfully to restrain that person", with only exception as provided therein. Therefore, whether the act of restrain was wrongful or not, can only be a matter of trial and this Court in exercise of power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. cannot proceed to interpret whether any alleged act of the petitioner falls within the meaning of wrongful restrain or not for which punishment prescribed under Section 341 IPC because of the FIR prima facie discloses allegations against the petitioner. Therefore, the ratio laid down in the Page No.# 6/7 case of Manik Taneja (supra) does not apply in the present facts of this case. 12. The ratio laid down in the case of Parbatbhai Aahir (supra) is reproduced hereinbelow:- "16. Bearing in mind the above principles which have been laid down in the decisions of this Court, we are of the view that the High Court was justified in declining to entertain the application for quashing the First Information Report in the exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. The High Court has adverted to two significant circumstances. Each of them has a bearing on whether the exercise of the jurisdiction under Section 482 to quash the FIR would subserve or secure the ends of justice or prevent an abuse of the process of the court. The first is that the appellants were absconding and warrants had been issued against them under Section 70 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The second is that the appellants have criminal antecedents, reflected in the chart which has been extracted in the earlier part of this judgment. The High Court adverted to the modus operandi which had been followed by the appellants in grabbing valuable parcels of land and noted that in the past as well, they were alleged to have been connected with such nefarious activities by opening bogus bank accounts. It was in this view of the matter that the High Court observed that in a case involving extortion, forgery and conspiracy where all the appellants were acting as a team, it was not in the interest of society to quash the FIR on the ground that a settlement had been arrived at with the complainant. We agree with the view of the High Court. The present case, as the allegations in the FIR would demonstrate, is not merely one involving a private dispute over a land transaction between two contesting parties. The case involves allegations of extortion, forgery and fabrication of documents, utilization of fabricated documents to effectuate transfers of title before the registering authorities and the deprivation of the complainant of his interest in land on the basis of a fabricated power of attorney. If the Page No.# 7/7 allegations in the FIR are construed as they stand, it is evident that they implicate serious offences having a bearing on a vital societal interest in securing the probity of titles to or interest in land. Such offences cannot be construed to be merely private or civil disputes but implicate the societal interest in prosecuting serious crime. In these circumstances, the High Court was eminently justified in declining to quash the FIR which had been registered under Sections 384 , 467 , 468 , 471 , 120- B and 506(2) of the Penal Code." 13. In this connection and in the context of the ratio laid down in the case of Parbhatbhai Aahir (supra), it is seen that the allegations in the FIR in this case in hand is that the money which was due, was not to paid the petitioner, he would engage Bodo extremists for the purpose of getting the demanded money. On the face of such allegations, this court is unable to arrive at the finding that the FIR does not disclose any ingredients of offence punishable under Section 506 IPC. 14. In view of the explicit plea taken in the FIR, the ratio laid down in the case of Parbhatbhai Aahir (supra) does not appear to help the petitioner. Accordingly, the present challenge to the charge-sheet bearing No.60/2017 dated 30.06.2017 under Sections 341 / 506 IPC is not sustainable and the criminal petition stands dismissed. 15. The petitioner and the respondent Nos.2 and 3 who are duly represented by the learned counsel shall appear before the learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Bijni without any further notice of appearance on 04.01.2019 and seek further instructions from the said learned Court. 16. Interim order passed earlier stands vacated. 17. Let the LCR be returned back. 18. It is made clear that this order shall not influence the learned trial court while deciding the case on its own merit. JUDGE Comparing Assistant