Arnab Goswami vs Bhojaraj R Patil S/O Ramachandrappa ... on 15 February, 2023 Author: V Srishananda Bench: V Srishananda -1- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA, KALABURAGI BENCH DATED THIS THE 15TH DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2023 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE V SRISHANANDA CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 200074 OF 2023 BETWEEN: MR. ARNAB GOSWAMI AGED ABOUT 49 YEARS, S/O LATE MR. MANORANJAN GOSWAMI, R/O. B-1701/1702, RAHEJA ATLANTIS CHS, GK MARG, LOWER PAREL, MUMBAI-400013 MAHARASHTRA ...PETITIONER (BY SRI. ARAVIND KAMAT L.SR.COUNSEL AND CHAITANYAKUMAR CHANDRIKI, ADVOCATE) AND: SRI. BHOJARAJ R PATIL Digitally S/O RAMACHANDRAPPA PATIL, signed by B NAGAVENI AGED 67 YEARS, Location: OCC: MEMBER OF LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY, High Court of R/O. NO. 172, KHB COLONY, Karnataka SHANTI NAGAR, OPPOSITE TO CBS, KALABURAGI-585103. ...RESPONDENT (BY SRI. SANTOSH S. PATIL, ADVOCATE) THIS CRL.P IS FILED U/S.482 OF CR.P.C. PRAYING TO A) QUASH THE ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS IN C.C. NO.5957/2019 (PCR NO. 210/2017) (ANNEXURE-B) FILED BY THE RESPONDENT BEFORE THE LEARNED Vth ADDITIONAL JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE FIRST CLASS, KALABURAGI, IN SO FAR AS IT RELATES TO THE PRESENT PETITIONER. B) -2- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 CONSEQUENTLY, QUASH AND SET ASIDE THE SUMMONING ORDER DATED 19.10.2019 AND BAILABLE WARRANT DATED 25.11.2022 PASSED BY THE LEARNED Vth ADDITIONAL JUDICIAL MAGISTRATE FIRST CLASS, KALABURAGI IN C.C.NO. 5957/2019 (PCR NO. 210/2017) AND ALL FURTHER PROCEEDINGS AND ORDERS IN RELATION TO CC NO. 5957/2019 (PCR NO. 210/2017) IN SO FAR AS IT RELATES TO THE PRESENT PETITIONER. C) ANY OTHER ORDERS WHICH THIS HONOURABLE COURT MAY DEEM FIT AND PROPER MAY KINDLY BE PASSED IN FAVOUR OF THE PETITIONER. THIS PETITION COMING ON FOR ADMISSION THIS DAY THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING: ORDER Heard Sri Aravind Kamat, learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of Sri Chaitanyakumar Chandriki, for the petitioner and Sri Santosh S. Patil, learned counsel for respondent and perused the records. 2. This petition is filed by the petitioner challenging the order dated 19.10.2019 issuing summons to the petitioner and ordering to register a case in C.C.No.5957/2019 for the offence punishable under Sections 499 and 500 r/w Section 149 of IPC by the learned V-Additional JMFC, Kalaburagi,. -3- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 3. Brief facts which are necessary for disposal of the present petition are as under: A sting operation has been conducted when the complainant was having a discussion in Hotel Lalit Ashok at Bengaluru on 27.05.2016. Rajyasabha elections were being held at that juncture and there was a conversation with regard to the politicians leaving one political party and joining another party perhaps by luring them with money. The transcription of conversation prima facie reveal that the complainant has also spoken few sentences which are per se injurious to the good and sound political system and the guidelines prevailing in the political parties in the country. Since the sentences spoken by the complainant were against the said norms, his opinion which was recorded in the sting operation was aired in the electronic media and were published in the print media. 4. In respect of the said incident, the respondent/complainant got annoyed and he felt that he has been duped and therefore, he lodged the complaint -4- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 with High Grounds Police Station, Bengaluru and a case came to be registered in Crime No.92/2016 for the offence punishable under Sections 417 , 420 , 468 , 153A 120B r/w Section 34 of IPC and Section 65 of Information Technology Act, 2000. Further, criminal action in the said case is stayed by the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Criminal Petition No.3869/2017. Till today, no efforts have been made by the defacto complainant to get the matter listed for final disposal and to have a logical end with regard to the said criminal case. 5. When the matter stood thus, it is the grievance of the respondent/complainant that by publication of the conversation which is part of the sting operation, his fame in his constituency has been reduced to such an extent that he has to lose the assembly election which was held in the year 2018. He lodged a private complaint in P.C.No.210/2017 on the file of the learned V-Additional JMFC, Kalaburagi, seeking action against the petitioner -5- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 herein for the offence punishable under Sections 499 and 500 of IPC. 6. After receipt of the private complaint, the learned Magistrate was required to follow the procedure as contemplated under Sections 200 and 202 of Cr.P.C., for taking the matter to the next level. In pursuance thereof, the sworn statement of the complainant was sought to be recorded. As could be seen from the material on record, instead of recording the sworn statement, the learned trial Magistrate has allowed examination-in-chief to be conducted by a Lawyer on behalf of the complainant. Based on such sworn statement (examination-in-chief) and also placing reliance on 9 documentary evidence which were also exhibited during the course of recording the sworn statement and marked as Exs.P1 to P9, the learned Trial Magistrate proceeded to issue summons. 7. Being aggrieved by the order of issuing summons, and when summons were not served directly -6- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 issuing the warrant by the learned Trial Magistrate is questioned in this petition. 8. Reiterating the grounds urged in the petition Sri Arvind Kamath, learned Senior counsel vehemently contended that the Trial Court was erred in summoning the petitioner before the Trial Court without even application of mind as to the required ingredients to attract the offence punishable under Section 499 and 500 of IPC and therefore, the very order of taking cognizance and summoning the petitioner is illegal and sought for quashing the entire proceedings including of taking cognizance and issuing summons. 9. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent/complainant supported the impugned order stating that prima facie grounds are made out to proceed against the petitioners for the offence punishable under Sections 499 and 500 of IPC and therefore, the petition filed by the petitioner is too premature and sought for dismissal of the same. -7- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 10. In reply, learned counsel representing the petitioner contended that the order of issuing summons is passed in a mechanical manner which is per se visible from the fact that the learned Magistrate has taken cognizance for the alleged offences of IPC when no such allegations are found from the complaint averments. 11. In the light of the arguments advanced on behalf of the parties, this Court perused the material on record meticulously. 12. Though learned counsel for the petitioner argued strenuously with vehemence about the merits of the matter. Having regard to the inherent procedural lapses committed by the learned Magistrate, this Court is of the opinion that further discussion on the merits of the matter is unnecessary for the disposal of the case on hand. 13. Admittedly, the learned Magistrate has adopted a wrong procedure in allowing the advocate of the -8- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 complainant to examine the complainant in chief when his sworn statement is recorded. Catena of judicial pronouncements of this Court has cautioned the District Judiciary that such a procedure is impermissible and it has to be discontinued. Despite such reported judicial pronouncements, the learned Magistrate has committed a grave error in allowing the examination-in-chief to be conducted while sworn statement of the complainant is recorded. Further, the same is made as a basis for assessing the prima facie case to summon the petitioner herein. 14. In this regard, this Court places its reliance on the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of Naganagouda Veeranagouda Patil and Another vs. Malatesh H. Kulkarni and Others reported in ILR 1997 KAR 2091. The relevant portion of the said decision reads as under: "5. We need to record here that the learned Advocates who represented the petitioners -9- CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 vehemently submitted that if the complainant's learned Advocate were to be permitted to carry out the examination-in-chief that it was not only a breach of the provisions of Section 200 , Cr.P.C. but that it would completely nullify the provisions of that section and would in fact have the totally opposite effect of what was originally intended by the Legislature when this section was incorporated in the Cr.P.C . in 1973. They have demonstrated to us, and perhaps with considerable justification that a private complaint presented to the learned Magistrate is invariably drafted by an Advocate and that therefore, there could be a certain degree of padding, that there could be also a skillful orientation of facts, a clever plant in the projection and a skillful effort to bring the complaint within the ambit of the four corners of a penal section and that the sum total of this artful exercise very often results in process being issued in criminal cases against the opposite party even though there may not have been justification to do so. The learned Advocates have pointed out that this sets of a total chain re-action in so far as a lot of harassment is caused to the accused even during the service of process and thereafter, and that having regard to the load on the trial Courts and the appeal Courts that an accused is required to contend with the proceeding for a long period of time, to undergo - 10 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 harassment and expenditure, as it is an uphill task to demonstrate finally that there was no justification for the issue of process. We do see considerable force in this argument because the whole purpose of enacting Section 200 Cr.P.C. was in order to weed out unjustified litigation and the immediate fall out of such unjustified complaints is the heavy burden on the Courts until those proceedings are finally disposed of. Learned Advocates did also demonstrate to us the inevitable side effects of such litigations which could be used to coerce parties into settlements which is not the intention of the law and judicial process can never be abused with this end in view. The effort on the part of the learned Advocates was directed towards impressing on the Court the absolute need to tighten up the scrutiny procedure for purposes of ensuring that only valid and genuine complaints survive and that all the others are eliminated at the scrutiny stage. They have therefore submitted that the whole purpose of enacting Section 200 Cr.P.C. would be frustrated completely if the complainant's learned Advocate were to be permitted to carry out the examination-in-chief because in that event the complaint would be bodily reproduced in the examination-in-chief and there would be less scope for the Presiding Judge to be able to assess the genuineness of the grievance that has been - 11 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 projected. It was therefore submitted that it is absolutely imperative that the learned Advocate be precluded from taking any part in the scrutiny process so that the Court has an unrestricted opportunity of independently examining the complaint, ascertaining from the complainant and the witnesses as to what the true position is and deciding whether it should be entertained or not." 15. Further, Section 200 of Cr.P.C., enjoins a mandatory duty on the Magistrate to examine the complainant and the witnesses present, if any. Therefore, mere examination of the complainant alone would not be sufficient to take cognizance of the offences alleged in a given case. Atleast one witness must support the case of the complainant. 16. But, as could be seen from the material on record, it is the complainant alone who is examined in the case on hand on oath. The sworn statement means a person must say that the allegations leveled in the complaint is true to his belief and information on oath. It should not be equated to the examination-in-chief. Law on - 12 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 the point and the procedure prescribed would also require that apart from the complainant, atleast one witness must be examined to assess the prima facie case against the accused for passing an order of issuance of summons. 17. In the case on hand, admittedly except the complainant, no other person is examined. The learned Magistrate has thus totally erred in not following the procedure and taking cognizance of the alleged offences against the petitioner herein. 18. As rightly contended by the learned counsel representing the petitioner, the learned Magistrate has also taken cognizance for the offence under Section 149 of IPC, though no such allegation is forthcoming in the complaint itself. The entire sworn statement in the form of examination-in-chief does not also depict that the petitioner had shared the common object of defaming the complainant so as to invoke Section 149 of IPC. - 13 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 19. Thus, this Court finds that there is sufficient force in the arguments canvassed on behalf of the petitioner herein that order taking cognizance and issuance of summons is mechanical in nature. 20. Further, what has been published either in the electronic media or in print media by the petitioner is the conversation that took place in the sting operation for which a case has already been lodged by the complainant before the High Grounds Police, Bengaluru for the offence punishable under Section 417 along with other offences of IPC . 21. What prevented the complainant to invoke Sections 499 and 500 of IPC in the same complaint is also a question that has not been looked into by the learned Magistrate while passing the order of issuing summons. 22. These aspects of the matter on cumulative consideration would result in irresistible conclusion that the order issuing summons suffers from legal infirmity and - 14 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 the procedural lapses and therefore, it needs to be quashed. 23. Learned counsel representing the petitioner also contended that if the Court is of the opinion that continuation of the proceedings is nothing but abuse of process of law, mere quashing the order of issuing summons would not serve the ends of justice and the whole complaint/proceedings needs to be quashed. 24. Such a contention later on behalf of the petitioner cannot be countenanced in law for the simple reason that if an order is challenged before the Court which is per se illegal, this Court is not expected to decide anything on the merits of the matter, as the same may prejudice the case of the parties, when the matter is remitted for fresh consideration before the competent Court. 25. In so far as the contention of Sri Aravind Kamat, learned Senior counsel is concerned, that issuance - 15 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 of summons is very much illegal in view of the fact that no ingredients of whatsoever is made out to attract the offence under Section 499 IPC is concerned since this Court is considering the validity of the impugned order passed by the Trial Court being justifiable order or not, has come to the conclusion that issuance of summons is based on the alleged sworn statement in the form of examination-in-chief which is deprecated in various judicial pronouncements including the judgment of the Division Bench referred to supra. The order summoning itself is incorrect and bad in law. The so called sworn statement in the form of examination-in-chief having been made as a basis for issuance of summons, this Court has no hesitation of whatsoever in stating that it is per se illegal. 26. In so far as the first prayer is concerned, since there is no procedure followed and no application was made before the Trial Magistrate, as could be seen from the impugned order, expressing any further opinion on the merits of the matter including a case is made out for - 16 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 issuance of summons for the offence punishable under Sections 499 and 500 IPC cannot also be gone into by this Court in remitting the matter to the Trial Court for fresh consideration in accordance with law. 27. Accordingly, reserving right to challenge the adverse order, that would be passed against him on post remand of the matter, the following order is passed: ORDER i) The Criminal Petition is allowed. ii) The order dated 19.10.2019 passed by V- Additional JMFC, Kalaburagi, in C.C.No.5957/2019 is hereby quashed. iii) The matter is remitted to the trial Court for fresh consideration and pass orders strictly in accordance with law. It is made clear that the observations made in this order is only for the purpose of disposal of the present petition and this Court has not expressed any opinion on the merits of the case on either of the parties, more so - 17 - CRL.P No. 200074 of 2023 with regard to the ingredients to attract the offence under Sections 499 and 500 IPC. Ordered accordingly. Sd/- JUDGE PL* List No.: 1 Sl No.: 53