Mammen Mathew vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 May, 2008 HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH : JABALPUR M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 1. Mammen Mathew, Chief Editor, The Week, Manorma Buildings, Panampilly Nagar, Ernakulam, Cochin - 682036. 2. Deepak Tiwari, Principal Correspondent, The Week, EN-1/24, Char Imli, Bhopal ............ Petitioners vs. 1. State of Madhya Pradesh, Through, S.H.O., P.S. T.T.Nagar, Bhopal, 2. S.S.Asthana, son of Late S.B.L.Asthana, aged 52 years, Resident of E-109/17, Shivaji Nagar, Bhopal. 3. Archana Gupta, wife of Sunil Gupta, aged about 30 years 4. Sunil Gupta, son of Shri B.C.Gupta, Aged 36 years, Residents of H-14-A/4, Jawahar Chowk, North T.T.Nagar, Bhopal (M.P.). ............ Respondents ........................................................................................ Shri P.S.Nair, Senior Advocate with Shri Millu Dandapani and Shri Prabhat K.Shrivastava, Advocates for the petitioners. Shri S.K.Kashyap, Dy. Govt. Adv. for respondent no.1/State. Shri Pranay Gupta, Advocate for respondent no.2. None of the respondents nos. 3 and 4 ........................................................................................ Date of Hearing : 14/02/2008 Date of Order : 05/05/2008 :: 2 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 ORDER This petition, under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short "the Code"), has been filed for having the prosecution for the offence of defamation quashed. The corresponding case is pending as R.T.No.11259/06 in the Court of Shri Arvind Raghuvanshi, Judicial Magistrate First Class, Bhopal. In that case, cognizance of the offence punishable under Section 500 of the IPC was taken upon a complaint made by respondent no.2 in respect of defamation in an article published in the weekly magazine "The Week" (hereinafter referred to as "the magazine"). In addition to the petitioners, the respondents nos.3 and 4 were also arraigned as accused in the complaint that related to offences punishable under Sections 191 , 195 , 196 , 201 , 500 and 511 of the IPC. 2. The allegations, as contained in the complaint, were focused at an article published in November 2, 2003 issue of the magazine with the caption 'Exploitation, Blackmail, Torture'. In the 4th page of the issue of the magazine, the petitioner no.1 was declared as the Chief Editor thereof whereas, admittedly, the petitioner no.2, at the relevant point of time, was working as the Principal Correspondent to the magazine at Bhopal. The respondent no.2, a resident of Bhopal, is also a journalist by profession. The article, in essence, covered story of so-called harrowing experience of respondent no.3, a 29-year-old teacher, who was allegedly subjected to sexual exploitation and blackmail by the respondent no.2 and was also abused sexually by some of the bureaucrats. 3. The corresponding averments made by the complainant/ respondent no.2 are to this effect that he was never interviewed by any correspondent of the magazine whereas an explanation purported to have been given by him at Bhopal was also published as an appendix to the :: 3 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 offending article and it was, therefore, evident that the local correspondent of the magazine viz. the petitioner no.2 and its Editor had taken active parts in the conspiracy hatched for bringing him to disrepute by concocting a completely false story. 4. The prosecution of the petitioners has been sought to be quashed on the following grounds :- (a) The cognizance of the offence was taken after the prescribed period of limitation. (b) The allegations made in the complaint read with the corresponding statements of complainant/respondent no.2 and his witnesses Anita and Pradeep Kumar do not constitute the offence of defamation. (c) Even otherwise, the petitioners were protected under Exceptions 1, 2, 3, 4 and 9 to Section 499 of the IPC in view of the following facts :- The coverage of respondent no.3's story was based on the information given by Shri A.P.Singh, the then Superintendent of Police, Bhopal in a Press Conference that was attended by the petitioner no.2 as the local correspondent of the magazine. It was a true report of facts made after proper verification based on the FIR, Press Conference, news-item appearing in various newspapers & electronic media and affidavit sworn by respondent no.3 before the National Commission for Women as well as tape recorded statement of respondent no.3. In any case, the publication of a true report regarding a public conduct of the public servant and conduct of the respondent no.2 as journalist that also touches a public question, was made in good faith. (d) No specific allegation was made against the petitioner no.l. who, being the Chief Editor, had no role to play in the publication of the offending article. Moreover, no :: 4 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 presumption, under Section 7 of Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 (for brevity 'the Act'), can be drawn against him, as he had no concern with the functions of the Editor as defined in Section 1(1) of the Act. 5. In reply, learned counsel for respondent no.2 has contended that for the purpose of Section 203 of the Code, the Magistrate was only required to ascertain whether there was sufficient ground to proceed against the accused/petitioners and not whether the prima facie evidence was sufficient for the purpose of their conviction for the offence. He is further of the view that question of applicability of any one of the exceptions to Section 499 of the IPC to a publication, defamatory per se, can only be examined on the basis of evidence adduced at the trial. Placing reliance on the following observations made by the Apex Court in K.M. Mathew vs. K.A. Abraham (2002) 6 SCC 670, he has urged that the complaint as against the petitioner no.1 is also maintainable - "The Managing Editor, Resident Editor or Chief Editor of a newspaper are not immune from prosecution for libellous matter published in the newspaper. Under S. 7 of the 1867 Act, there is a presumption that the Editor whose name is printed in the newspaper as Editor shall be held to be the Editor in any civil or criminal proceedings in respect of that publication and the production of a copy of the newspaper containing his name printed thereon as Editor shall be deemed to be sufficient evidence to prove that fact, and as the 'Editor' has been defined as the person who controls the selection of the matter that is published in a newspaper, the presumption would go to the extent of holding that he was the person who controlled the selection of the matter that was published in the newspaper. But at the same time, this presumption contained in S. 7 is a rebuttable presumption and it will be deemed as sufficient evidence unless the contrary is proved. That does not mean that there is statutory immunity against Managing Editor, Resident Editor or Chief Editor against any prosecution for the alleged publication of any matter in the newspaper over which these persons exercise control. Though, a similar presumption :: 5 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 cannot be drawn against the Chief Editor, Resident Editor or Managing Editor, nevertheless, the complainant can still allege and prove that they had knowledge and they were responsible for the publication of the defamatory news item. Even the presumption under S. 7 is a rebuttable presumption and the same could be proved otherwise. That, by itself, indicates that somebody other than Editor can also be held responsible for selecting the matter for publication in a newspaper." 6. The preliminary objection as to limitation appears to be based on the notion that cognizance of the offence, allegedly committed on 02.11.2003, was taken by the Magistrate after the prescribed period of limitation on 18.12.2006 by directing issuance of process against the petitioners. However, the fact of the matter is that the complaint was filed on 26.10.2005 and on the same day, learned Magistrate had taken cognizance of the offence by applying his mind and fixing a date for recording of the statement of the complainant ( Devarapalli Lakshminarayana Reddy vs. V. Narayana Reddy AIR 1976 SC 1672 referred to). Further, in CREF Finance Ltd. vs. Shree Shanthi Homes Pvt. Ltd. AIR 2005 SC 4284, the Supreme Court has reaffirmed the view that the words "cognizance taken" need not be mentioned in the corresponding order. In that case, the following observations made earlier in Ajit Kumar Palit vs. State of W.B. AIR 1963 SC 765 were quoted with approval :- "The word "cognizance" has no esoteric or mystic significance in criminal law or procedure. It merely means become aware of and when used with reference to a Court or Judge, to take notice of judicially. It was stated in Gopal Marwari v. Emperor (AIR 1943 Pat 245) by the learned Judges of the Patna High Court in a passage quoted with approval by this Court in R.R. Chari v. State of Uttar Pradesh (1951 SCR 312, 320) that the word, 'cognizance' was used in the Code to indicate the point when the Magistrate or Judge takes judicial notice of an offence and that it was a word of indefinite import, and is not perhaps always used in exactly the same sense. As observed in :: 6 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 Emperor v. Sourindra Mohan Chuckerbutty (1910 ILR 37 Cal 412, 416), "taking cognizance does not involve any formal action; or indeed action of any kind, but occurs as soon as a Magistrate, as such, applies his mind to the suspected commission of an offence." 7. In this view of the matter, cognizance of the offence, punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, as taken on 26.10.2005 was well within the period of three years prescribed under Section 468(2)(c) of the Code. The plea of limitation, therefore, deserves to be rejected as misconceived. 8. The proposition that the question as to protection under any of the exceptions to Section 499 of the IPC can not be examined for quashing of the complaint under Section 482 of the Code is well settled. The leading decision on the point is one delivered by the Apex Court in Sewakram Sobhani vs. R.K. Karanjiya, Chief Editor, Weekly Blitz AIR 1981 SC 1514 that was followed in all subsequent decisions including M.N. Damani vs. S.K. Sinha AIR 2001 SC 2037. Accordingly, it is for the accused/petitioners to plead and prove that his case would come within any one of the exceptions to Section 499 of the IPC. This apart, the inherent powers, under Section 482 of the Code, are to be exercised ex debito justitiae to prevent abuse of the process of the Court but not to stifle a legitimate prosecution, when the issue involved, whether factual or legal, can not be decided without sufficient material ( Minu Kumari vs. State of Bihar (2006) 4 SCC 359 relied on). Keeping in mind these well-settled principles, none of the exceptions can be taken into consideration for deciding the prayer for quashing the prosecution for defamation. 9. This brings me to the question of penal liability of the petitioner no.1 as the Chief Editor of the magazine. However, before proceeding :: 7 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 to enter into the merits of the rival contentions, it would be necessary to advert to Section 7 and other relevant provisions of the Act :- Section 7 . Office copy of declaration to be prima-facie evidence. In any legal proceeding whatever, as well civil as criminal, the production of a copy of such declaration as is aforesaid, attested by the seal of some Court empowered by this Act to have the custody of such declarations, or, in the case of the editor, a copy of the newspaper containing his name printed on it as that of the editor shall be held (unless the contrary be proved) to be sufficient evidence, as against the person whose name shall be subscribed to such declaration, or printed on such newspaper, as the case may be that the said person was printer or publisher, or printer and publisher (according as the words of the said declaration may be) of every portion of every newspaper whereof the title shall correspond with the title of the newspaper mentioned in the declaration, for the editor of every portion of that issue of the newspaper of which a copy is produced. 10. Definitions of 'Editor' and 'Newspaper' have been given in Section 1(1) of the Act as under :- "Editor" means the person who controls the selection of the matter that is published in a newspaper. ......................... "Newspaper" means any printed periodical work containing public news or comments on public news. 11. Section 5 prescribes rules as to publication of newspapers in the following terms :- No newspaper shall be published in India, except in conformity with the rules hereinafter laid down: (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 3 , every copy of every such newspaper shall contain the names of the owner and editor thereof printed clearly on such copy and also the date of its publication. :: 8 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 ................................... 12. The corresponding declaration printed on page 4 of the magazine may be reproduced as under : - (i) Chief Editor : Mammen Mathew (Petitioner no.1) (ii) Managing Editor : Philip Mathew (iii) Editor-in-Charge : T.R. Gopaalakrushnan (iv) Senior Copy Editor : V.S. Jayaschandran (v) News Editor : Stanley Thomas 13. As explained in State of Maharashtra vs. Dr. R.B. Chowdhari , AIR 1968 SC 110, where there is mentioned an editor as a person who is responsible for selection of the material, Section 7 of the Act raises presumption in respect of such a person only. Obviously, the statutory presumption could not be drawn against the petitioner no.1, who had not declared himself as Editor of the magazine but it must be held that he had no concern with the publishing of the article. The ratio laid down in R.B. Choudhary 's case (above) was followed in Haji C.H. Mohammad Koya vs. T.K.S.M.A. Muthukoya , (1979) 2 SCC 8 wherein it was held that the post of Chief Editor is purely ornamental and he is not the Editor as understood in Section 1(1) of the Act. It was further reiterated in K.M. Mathew vs. State of Kerala (1992) 1 SCC 217 that Section 7 of the Act does not recognize any other legal entity other than the Editor for raising the presumption. Accordingly, no presumption would attach to the petitioner no.1, though declared as the Chief Editor, that it is he who had selected the material for publication in the magazine. He can also not be made vicariously liable for any act of the Editor. 14. The factual scenario in K.A. Abraham 's case (supra) is clearly distinguishable. In that case, the Editor had not come forward to admit :: 9 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 responsibility for selecting the alleged defamatory matter published whereas, in the case on hand, there is no occasion to make such a finding in view of the fact that the Editor of the magazine was not arraigned as accused in the complaint. Further, it was nowhere alleged therein that the petitioner no.1, in the capacity of Chief Editor, had knowledge and was responsible for the publication of the offending article. Instead, it was averred that the Editor of the magazine was one of the conspirators in reference to a common intention to defame the respondent no.2. Moreover, the allegations made by the respondent no.2, in his examination, under Section 200 of the Code, against the petitioner no.1 were not only general and vague in nature but were also apparently inconsistent with the corresponding averments incorporated in the complaint. This apart, the respondent no.2, being a journalist, was expected to know the difference between an Editor and an Editor-in- Chief. It is relevant to note that none of his witnesses namely Anita and Pradeep Kumar had stated any specific incriminating fact against the petitioner no.1. On these facts, the ratio laid down in K.A. Abraham's case (above) is of no avail to the complainant/respondent no.2. 15. In Nagawwa v. Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi , AIR 1976 SC 1947, the Apex Court illustrated the following cases, wherein the prayer to quash criminal proceedings, under the inherent powers, would be justified :- (1) Where the allegations made in the complaint or the statement of the witnesses recorded in support of the same taken at their face value make out absolutely no case against the accused or the complainant does not disclose the essential ingredients of an offence which is alleged against the accused; (2) Where the allegations made in the complaint are potently absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent person can ever reach a conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused; :: 10 :: M.Cr.C. No.1506/2007 (3) Where the discretion exercised by the Magistrate in issuing process is capricious and arbitrary having been based either on no evidence or inadmissible; and (4) Where the complaint suffers from fundamental legal defects such as want of sanction, or absence of a complaint by legally competent authority and the like. 16. Further, in Delhi Municipality vs. Ram Krishan, AIR 1983 SC 67, the Supreme Court reiterated the aforesaid principles in the following terms : "the proceedings against an accused in the initial stages can be quashed only if on the face of the complaint or the papers accompanying the same, no offence is constituted. In other words, the test is that taking the allegations and the complaint as they are, without adding or subtracting anything, if no offence is made out then the High Court will be justified in quashing the proceedings in exercise of its powers under Section 482 of the Code." 17. Applying these principles to the facts of the case on hand, it is the prosecution of the petitioner no.1 only that deserves interference under the inherent powers. 18. To sum up, even if the allegations as made in the complaint are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, no offence would be made out against the petitioner no.1. As such, the case against him falls under category (1) of the cases attracting interference under the inherent powers as enumerated in Nagawwa 's case (supra) as well as in State of Haryana vs. Bhajan Lal , AIR 1992 SC 604. 19. In the result, the petition is partly allowed and the proceedings against the petitioner no.1 Mammen Mathew in R.T. No. 11259/06 (above) are hereby quashed. However, the proceedings as against the petitioner no.2 Deepak Tiwari shall continue in accordance with law. Petition partly allowed. (R.C.Mishra) JUDGE 05.05.2008