Shri Lucky Choudhary vs Smt. Chameli Devi on 22 December, 2007 1 IN THE COURT OF SH. PADAM KANT SAXENA ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE: DELHI Criminal Revision No. 66/2007 Shri Lucky Choudhary S/o Shri Rattan Singh Chaudhary R/o Village Molarband, New Delhi-110 044. ....Revisionist Vs. 1. Smt. Chameli Devi W/O Late Bal Kishan R/O House No. 7, Molarband Extension, P.O. Badarpur, New Delhi-44. 2. Shri S.S. Panwar, Advocate, Chamber no. 560, Western Wing Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi-110 054. ....Respondents/Accused Date of Institution : 06.10.2007 Date of Final Arguments : 14.12.2007 Judgment reserved on : 20.12.2007 Date of Judgment : 22.12.2007 JUDGMENT 1. Vide this judgment I shall dispose of the present criminal revision petition under Section 397 Cr.P.C., 1973 ( for 1 Of 12 2 short referred to as ' the Code') which has been filed by the petitioner/revisionist against the respondents impugning the judgment dated 29.8.2007 passed by Shri Sandeep Yadav, learned M.M., Delhi whereby petitioner's complaint against the respondents under Section 500 IPC subject matter of CC No. 270/1, had been dismissed. 2. I have heard Ld. counsel for the petitioner, have gone through the records of learned trial Court as also the record of this Court . 3. At the threshold I may point out that the said complaint case had been dismissed by learned trial Court at the pre-summoning stage itself. In the face of this fact, in my view there was no need to serve the notice of the present petition on the respondents. (Refer J.K. International vs. State, 2002 IV A.D. Delhi 211). 4. For better appreciation of the merits of the present revision petition , it would be useful to refer briefly to the facts which led to the filing of the present petition. In brief case of the 2 Of 12 3 present petitioner as disclosed in the complaint filed before learned trial court as also in the present revision petition is that he i.e. the revisionist is the owner of the immovable property bearing no.7, measuring 200 sq. yards out of Khasra no. 442, situated in the revenue estate of village Molarband Extension, P.O. Badarpur, New Delhi 110044, comprising of eight rooms, bathroom and laterine which had been let out to the respondent no.1 on a monthly rent of Rs.1500/- excluding other charges, that respondent no.1 was a habitual defaulter in the payment of rent and fell into arrears of rent since 1.1.1998 and failed to vacate and hand over the vacant possession of the said tenanted premises to him i.e. the revisionist inspite of termination of her tenancy, that finding no other option, he filed a suit for recovery of possession of tenanted premises and arrears of rent against respondent no.1 which is pending in the court of Ms. Samita Garg, Civil Judge, Delhi, that respondent no.1 had engaged respondent no.2 for defending her in the aforesaid suit, that on 29.5.2004, respondent no.2 at the behest of his client i.e. respondent no.1 during the course of cross-examination of the present petitioner made imputation and put the following suggestion :- 3 Of 12 4 "That you are a Gujar by cast and you along with your brother and father are land grabbers and used to grab the land of others." 5. The petitioner further averred in his aforesaid complaint that, in response to the aforesaid question, he i.e. the present petitioner gave the following reply:- " It is correct that we are Gujar by caste. It is wrong to suggest that I along with my brother and father are "land grabbers" and used to grab the land of others." 6. It is further the case of the petitioner that the aforesaid Question put to him by respondent no. 2 is derogatory and defamatory, that the respondents circulated the said false story put by them amongst friends, neighbours, relatives and his known persons i.e. of the revisionist due to which he i.e. the revisionist has been defamed publicly in the society, that the respondents had made the aforesaid false, frivolous, vexatious and defamatory allegation against the revisionist solely with a 4 Of 12 5 view to lower down his reputation and prestige i.e. of the revisionist in the society, that his brother and father are stated to be respectable persons of the village and enjoy a good reputation in the area, that the respondents failed to prove their defamatory allegations levelled against the revisionist, that due to false, frivolous and defamatory allegations levelled by the respondents, the reputation and prestige of the revisionist has been lowered in the society of his known persons , that due to the said defamatory allegations , the revisionist has been cornered by his friends and other residents of the said village and everybody is afraid of dealing with him, that he has been socially boycotted, that the loss suffered by him i.e. the revisionist due to wrongful acts of the respondents cannot be compensated in terms of money, that revisionist was thus constrained to send a legal notice dated 7.1.2005, that the respondent no.1 with malafide intention evaded the service of notice sent through registered AD post but the said notice was ultimately duly served upon him, that he i.e. respondent no.1 through respondent no.2 got issued a false and frivolous reply thereto, that the respondents failed to pay damages or tender unconditional apology for their wrongful acts and that he i.e. the petitioner was thereafter constrained to file the said complaint under Section 500 IPC against the 5 Of 12 6 respondents which came to be dismissed vide the impugned order dated 29.8.2007. According to the petitioner the said impugned order passed by the learned trial court is bad in law, as well as against the facts and circumstances of the case and is liable to be set aside. 7. It is in view of the aforesaid factual matrix, the present petitioner wants this court to set aside the said impugned order. 8. The question that arises for consideration is whether the impugned order passed by learned trial court is illegal or improper or suffers from any material irregularity within the meaning of Section 397(1) of the Code and therefore needs to be set aside in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction by this court or not. 9. In order to appreciate whether the aforesaid question referred to in paragraph no.4 hereinbefore is defamatory and therefore liable for action or not, a reference has to be made to the pleadings of the parties subject matter of the relevant suit. 6 Of 12 7 10. File of the said civil suit has been called for by me. The said civil suit filed by the present petitioner on 14.3.2001 against the present respondent no.1 and it was registered as suit no. 117/2001. However, at present the said civil suit bears no. 24/04/01 and is pending in the court of Shri Sidharth Mathur, Civil Judge, Delhi. In the said plaint, the present petitioner claimed himself to be the landlord of property bearing No. 7, Khasra no.442, Tehsil Kalkaji, (now colony known as Molarband Extension), P.O. Badarpur, New Delhi- 110 044 (for short referred to as 'the suit property'). According to him, the suit property had been let out to the respondent no.1 who was stated to be in arrears of rent and therefore the petitioner wanted to recover possession thereof and arrears of rent in respect thereto. However, respondent no.1 filed a detailed written statement dated 31.7.2001 wherein inter alia it was claimed that the correct number of the suit property was 2-C, Gali no.14, measuring 200 Sq. Yards, Molarband Extension, revenue estate of village Molarband, New Delhi 110044 and not as has been mentioned by the petitioner. Respondent no.1 also claimed that she had bought the property from one Shri B.B. Sharma, vide Agreement to sell, General Power of Attorney, affidavit and receipt dated 14.01.1985 and therefore, according to her relationship of 7 Of 12 8 landlord and tenant did not exist between the petitioner and her. She also claimed that the petitioner and his father Shri Rattan Singh Chaudhary were mischievous, dishonest and land grabbers and had tried to grab the suit property also. The present petitioner in his replication had denied the said facts. 11. Ld. Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the complaint case had been wrongly dismissed by learned trial court and in this regard he was relied upon two judgments reported as Deepchand Vs. Sampathraj , 1970 Crl.L.J.260 and Ayeasha Bi Vs. Peerkhan Sahib and others , AIR 1954 Madras 741. 12. It is well settled that Section 499 Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short referred to as I.P.C .) requires inter-alia an intention on the part of the accused to harm the reputation of the complainant or the knowledge that the imputation made by him will harm such reputation. 13. The intention of a person has to be inferred from various circumstances and can not possibly be established by any 8 Of 12 9 direct evidence. 14. I may also refer to the case reported as Rajendra Kumar Sitaram Pande and others Vs. Uttam and another., 1999 I AD (SC) 609. This was a case where the official had made complaint to the Treasury Officer, Amravati, alleging that the complainant had come to office in a drunken state and abused the Treasury Officer, Additional Treasury Officer and the Collector and circulated in the office in the filthy language. These accusations made in the complaint were treated by the complainant as defamatory and on the basis of this, alleging it to be a false imputation, the complainant had filed a complaint under Section 500 IPC contending that the accused persons had committed the offence of defamation. Hon'ble Supreme Court pointed out that the question for consideration was whether the allegations in the complaint, read out with report of the magistrate, make out the offence under Section 500 IPC or not. In that case,on the basis of complaint of the accused persons, a departmental inquiry had been initiated and the complainant was found guilty. In these circumstances, the Supreme Court held that the fact that the accused persons had made a report to the 9 Of 12 10 superior officer of the complainant alleging that he had abused the Treasury Officer in a drunken state, which was the gravamen of the complaint, would be covered by Exception 8 to Section 499 of the IPC as the complaint was made to a lawful authority over the person with regard to the subject matter of accusation. 15. At this stage a reference may also be made to a judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the case of Dr. P. Sharma Vs. P.S. Popli and another , 2002 (1) JCC 66. In that case the complainant had filed a complaint against the petitioner under Sections 420 / 336 / 338 IPC and the petitioner was summoned as an accused in the said case. Against those summoning orders petitioner had gone upto the Supreme Court and proceedings were ordered to be quashed by the Supreme Court and proceedings were ordered to be quashed by the Supreme court. In the SLP filed in the Supreme Court, in which the complaint proceedings were quashed, the petitioner had pleaded that complaint filed by the complainant was wholly mischievous and intended to blackmail him. On these averments contained in the SLP, the complainant filed a complaint under Section 500 IPC alleging that these were defamatory allegations 10 Of 12 11 and amounted to an offence under Section 499 punishable under Section 500 IPC. The question was as to whether on the basis of such utterances made in the SLP by the petitioner against the complainant, the complainant was within his right to file a complaint under Section 500 IPC. Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the said judgment held that apparently the imputation was preferred in good faith by the petitioner to get the order of summoning quashed and it could not be said to have been made with the intention or knowledge to cause harm to the reputation of the complainant. It was also observed that the allegations were made before the Supreme Court, which undoubtedly had authority over the subject matter in dispute, and therefore the case was covered under Exception 8 provided to Section 499 IPC and no offence was made out and the complaint under Section 500 I.P.C. filed by the respondent was quashed. 16. What do we find in the present case? In the aforesaid civil suit petitioner claimed himself to be the owner of the suit property subject matter of that case which he claimed to be let out to respondent no.1 on rent. However, respondent no.1 denied this and claimed herself to be the owner having purchased the same from erstwhile owner. The said case is still pending 11 Of 12 12 trial and is yet to be decided. Rival contentions of the petitioner and respondent no.1 therein are yet to be adjudicated upon by the concerned court. So the said complaint case was filed by the petitioner prematurely and no fault can be found in the said finding of learned trial court. Besides it appears to me that the said accusation was made by respondent no. 2 on behalf of respondent no.1 bonafide and in good faith in the court which is seized of the matter in assertion of the right of respondent no.1 and for denying title of the petitioner in respect of the suit property. In view of the law mentioned above in the case of Rajender Kumar and Dr.P. Sharma (Supra) it is clear that the case in question is clearly covered by Exception 8 appended to Section 499 IPC. 17. Upshot of the aforesaid discussion persuades me to hold that there is no material irregularity, or illegality or impropriety in the impugned order passed by learned trial court. Resultantly the present petition being merit less stands dismissed. Dictated and announced (PADAM KANT SAXENA) in the open court today ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE: i.e. on 22.12.2007 DELHI. 12 Of 12