The Commission Of Inquiry Act 1952 LAW COMMISSION OF INDIA TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT ('ma COMMISSIONS or INQUIRY ACT,1952) DECEMBER, :96: GOVERNMENT OF INDIA : MINISTRY OF LAW H0 M of L.----1 CHAIRMAN, LAW COMMISSION, 5, Jorbagh, New De]hi----3, Dated 26th December, I962. Shri Asoka Kumar Sen, Mz'm'ster 0 1' .Law, N 8'11?) Delhi. MY DEAR Mnnsren, I have great pleasure in forwarding herewith the Twenty- Fourth Report of the Law Commission on the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952. 2. The subject was referred by the Government to the Law Comnnssion under the circumstances mentioned in paragraph 1 of the Report, and was taken up in December, 1961 for consideration. A draft Report was prepared and discussed at the 37th meeting of the Law Commission held on the 7th April, I962. Certain points were reconsidered at the 38th meeting of the Law Commission held on 5th May, 1962. In conformity with the decisions taken at those meetings the draft Report was revised. 3. The draft Report, as so revised, was circulated to State *Governments. High Courts, Bar Associations and also to -certain eminent Judges who, as Chairmen of certain Commis- -sions appointed under the Act, had practical experience of its working. The comments received on the draft Report were considered by the Law Commission at the 42nd meeting held on the I7th and 18th December, 1962, and the draft Report was revised in accordance with the decisions taken at that meeting and ﬁnalised. 4. Mr. Niren De was unable to attend the meeting of the Commission at which the Report was ﬁnalised. The Report has not, therefore, been signed by him. I am, however, autho- rised by him to state that he concurs in the recommendations made in the Report. (ii) 5. My colleagues and I wish to record our appreciation of the assistance we have received from our Joint Secretary 8: Draftsman, Mr. S. K. Hiranandani and Additional Draftsman, Mr. P. M. Bakshi. Yours sincerely, J. L. KAPUR- REPORZT ON THE COMMISSIONS OF INQUIRY ACT, 195-2 CONTENTS PARAGRAPH SUBJECT-MATTER 1. Reference to Law Commission 2. Genesis of existing Act 3. Anaiysis of the Act 4. Purposes for which Act used 5. Analogous laws in other countries 6. Differences between English and Indian Acts 7. Defects and drawbacks of inquiries by Com~ missions . . . . . . 3-9. Iustiﬁcation for our Act 10. Some general points examined . 11. Power of Governmen to appoint Commissions mo mom - - - - - - - I2. Contempt of Commission . . . . 13. Application of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 14. Procedure of Commission . 15. Costs . . . 16. Publication of Report . . . 17. Assistance to Coinrnission for purposes of investi- gation . . . . . . . 13. Detailed examination of Act . . . . 19. Section 3(I).--eRelevant legislative entries 20. Section 3(I).--~ConstitLitional validity . . 21. Section 3(1).---\'i»'hether resolution should be by both Houses of the Legislature 22. Section 3(I).--Possib1e overlapping in jurisdiction between Central and State Govern- ments' Cornrnissions . . 23-24. Section 3(i').----Scc_1pe_.- of functions of the Com- mission . . . . 25. Section 3.----Fixing of time 26. Section 3.----Fillii-ig up of vacancies, etc. 27. Section 4.---Personal attendance of witnesses 28. Section 5(2) . . 29. Section 5(3) . . 30. Section 5.---Contempt of Commissions (iii) PAGES 1i------12 12-13 13 I3 13 I3--I4 I4 i4---:5 i5----I6 i6---17 1? 17 17-48 13 18-19 19-20 PARAGRAPH 31. 32. 33- 34- 35- 36. 37- APPENDIX ( iv ) SUBJECT-MA'I"1'ER Section 6.----Incr1'rm'nating Statements . Section 6A (New) Section 8 . . . . . . Section 8A (New) . . . . . Section 12 Other changes . Appendices APPENDICES I---Showing the proposals in the form of draft amendments to the existing Act . . APPENDIX II--Notes on Clauses I ----Containing a statement showing the Con1.tnis- sions appointed under the Act . . . PAGES 20-----2l 21 2.1 2I--22 22 2.2 22 z3----26 27--~--4I 42-54 asroar on THE. COMMISSIONS or INQUIRY ACT, 1952 1. The circumstances in which the Commissio_ns_ of Eefercncc to Inquiry Act, 1952, was referred to the Law Comrlrunlsslon mggioifm' may be brieﬂy stated._ Section 5'(2) of the Act ant orises a commission of inquiry to require any Person to 1""-"Sh information useful for, or relevant to, the matters under inquiry. No penalty is provided in the Act for disobedience to such a requisition, and the Press Commission, consti- tuted under the Act, appears to have experienced some difﬁculty in collecting the required information. Govern- ment had, therefore, referred this matter to us for examina- tion. Taking into account the importance of the islet and the need for a proper system of inquiries, we have, instead of conﬁning ourselves to the speciﬁc points reierred_to US, referred to undertake a comprehensive examination of e entire Act in the 1' ht of the working of the Act during the last ten years, the ractice in other countries in relation to in uiries, and the vast thought-provoking literature on the sgbject. 2. The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 was enacted Genesis of after due consultation with State Governments to facilitate the setting up of commissions with requisite powers to °'° inquire into and report on any matter of pubiic importance. Government realised, on the basis of its previous experience, that the expedient of promoting special legislation for setting up a commission of inquiry each time the need for it arose involved a tardy process which more often than not ended in the withdrawal of the proposals for inquiry. On the other hand Government felt convinced of the utility of such inquiries as a means of arriving at a proper appraisal of matters of public importance and of infusing the conﬁdence of the public in its administration and conduct. As the necessity for such inquiries was bound to be a recurring one, it was felt advantageous to have an enactment generalising the powers which commissions of inqixiry may exercise and leaving it to the Government to constitute a commission as and when necessary. Such, in iiglalzrt, is the genesis of the Commissions of Inquiry Act , 3. The Act is a short one, consisting of 12 sections. ,a_na;._;.s my Section 2 deﬁnes, inter aha, 'appropriate Government' to the Act. mean the Central Government in relation to any matter relatable to any of the entries in List I or List II or List III in the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, and the State Government in relation to any matter relatable to any of the entries in List II or List Ill in that Schedule. Under section 3 , a commission of inquiry for the purposes of making an inquiry into any deﬁnite matter of public Importance may be appointed by the 'appropriate Govern- ment' of its own motion; but if a resolution in this behalf Purposes for which Act uscd. 2 is passed by the House of the People or, as thecase may be, the Legislative Assembly of a State. it i-s obligatory. on the appropriate Government to appoint such a commission. Where a commission is appointed by the Central Govern- ment, a State Government cannot appoint a commission to inquire into the same matter except with the approval of the Central Government, and conversely, where a commission is appointed by a State Government, the Central Govern- ment is barred from appointing another commission to inquire into the same matter unless the_ Central Govern- ment is of opinion that the scope of the inquiry should _be extended to two or more States. A Commission of Inquiry may consist of one or more members. Section 4 confers upon a Commission of Inquiry certain powers of a civil court (sag. summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses and examining them on oath, etc.). Section 5 empowers the 'appropriate Government' to confer some additional powers on a Commission of Inquiry relating to the production of information and seizure of books of account or documents. Subsection (4) of section 5 lays down that a Commission of Inquiry shall be deemed to be a civil court and when any offence as is described in section 175, section 178, section 179, section 180 or section 228 of the Indian Penal Code is committed in the view or presence of the Commission, it may forward the case to a magistrate for trial. Sub--section (5) of section 5 enacts that any proceeding before a Commission shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding for the purpose of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code. Section 6 confers upon persons giving evidence before the Commission protection from prosecution except for perjury. Section 7 empowers the 'appropriate Government' to dissolve a Commission when its continuance becomes unnecessary. Under section B the Commission may regulate its own procedure subject to any rules made by the 'appropriate Government'. Section 9 contains the usual indemnity for action taken in good faith and section 10 provides that members of a Commission and other officers appointed by it to exercise functions under the Act shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code . Under section 11 the provisions of the Act may also be made applicable to a Commission of Inquiry set up by the appropriate Govern- ment in the exercise of its executive power. Section 12 authorises the appropriate Government to make rules to carry out the purposes of the Act. 4. The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 has been used for a variety of purposes} The inquiry which has received the widest Pliblicity under the Act was the "Mundhra Inquiry" which led to the resignation of the then Finance Minister. This inquiry, held by a Commission consisting of a single member, the former Chief Justice of the Bombay 1See Appendix III for a statement showing the Commission: appointed under the Act 3 High Court, Mr. M. C. Chagla, related to certain invest- ments of the funds of the Life Insurance Corporation of India alleged to have been improperly made. 5. Before taking up the examination of the Act it willi:""1"l.3°'"' be useful to deal brieﬂy with analogous laws in other 0,'f',':,_. " countries and consider in some detail the English Legis- countries. lation on the subject on which our Act is largely modelled- (a) In England, inquiries are held under the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act, 1921. Before this Act was passed, inquiries were held by Com- mittees of Parliament. An inquiry by a Committee of Parliament suﬁered from one serious defect. A Committee of Parliament is likely to be inﬂuenced by political considerations. This is well illustrated by the Reports of the Parliamentary Committee in the Marconi case. The Act , however, does not exclude inquiries by Parliamentary Committees. In some cases, Committees of Parliament may still be appoint- ed for making certain kinds of inquiries, particularly inquiries the subject--matter of which is predominantly political. (b) In Australia, there is the Royal Commissions Act, 1902----33. This is a. general Act relating to inquiries by Royal Commissions. In view of certain constitutional difﬁculties and the decision of the Privy Council in the Colonial Sugar Reﬁnery Company': case', it has been the practice of the Commonwealth to enact special legislation empowering the setting up of commissions of inquiry in relation to speciﬁc matters and to incorporate the provisions of the General Act therein (e.g. the Royal Commission Act, 1954, No. 2 of 1954, and the Royal Commission on Espionage Act, 1954, No. 28 of 1954). (c) In Canada, the relevant Act in force is the Inquiries Act, 1927. (d) There does not appear to be any law analogous to the English Act in force in the United States of America. It appears that in that country, inquiries are held by a Committee of the Congress. Committees of the Congress to inquire into un-American activities are well-known throughout the world. A Committee of Congress has power to examine Witnesses on oath and to punish for its contempt." (e) In Ceylon, inquiries are held under the (Ceylon) Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1948. lAttorney'-General for Commonwealth v. Colonial Sugar Re- ﬁnery Co. Ltd. (1954) A. C. 237:1'? C.L.R. 644 discussed in Wynes, Legislative etc. Powers in Australia (1956), page 490_ 2A1an Barth, Government by Investigation, page 17. 140 M of L.--2 4 6. As already mentioned,1 the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 is largely modelled on the English Act , but it differs from it in certain respects. The Indian Act empowers the Government to set up a Commission of Inquiry suo motu. There is no corresponding pI'OV1SIOn in the English Act. Under the English Act a resolution of both Houses of Parliament is required for setting. up a Tribunal of Inquiry, while the Indian Act requires a resolution of the House of the People only, or, as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly of a State. The English Act does not make the resolution binding on the Govern- ment, although normally the Government would respect the wishes of Parliament; but in India, the resolution of the House of the People or the Legislative Assembly is binding on the Central Government or the State Govern- ment, as the case may be. The English Act provides that if any contempt of the Tribunal is committed, the Tribunal can refer the matter to the High Court which will punish or take steps for the punishment of the person guilty of contempt in like manner as if he had been guilty of con- tempt of the High Court. There is no such provision in the Indian Act. The English Act expressly provides that an inquiry shall generally be held in public. The Indian Act leaves it to the Commission to hold its sittings in public or in private. The Indian Act provides that where any authority, by whatever name called, other than a Commission appointed under the Act has been, or is set up, under any resolution or order of the Government for the purpose of making an inquiry into any matter of public importance, the Government may direct that all or any of the provisions of the Act shall be applicable to that authority. 'I11ere is no corresponding provision in the English Act . '7. The working of the laws relating to inquiries by Commissions or Tribunals in various countries has revealed several defects and drawbacks. First, in the absence of speciﬁc clear-cut provisions for the purpose, there is a danger of inquiries being instituted in relation to matters in which the remedies available under the ordinary law are adequate and eﬁective. Thus, in England, in the famous Waters case an elaborate and expensive inquiry was embarked upon to investigate into allegations of a merciless assault by two constables on a young boy. Indeed, one of the criticisms directed in Parliament against the Bill leading to our Act was that it did not precisely deﬁne the circumstances in which a Commission may be set up. Secondly, the powers usually conferred on Commissions are felt to be rather draconian in practice. When the 1Para. 5 supm_ opening sentence. Waters case was debated upon in the House of Lords} some of the Members Went to the extent of likening Tribunals under the English Act to the Court of Star Chamber. Similarly, in the course of the debates on our own Com- missions of Inquiry Bill in Parliament the provisions as to requisition of information and search of premises were characterised by some members as drastic. Thirdly, a Commission may virtually lead a person to make self-incriminating statements. In regard to the procedure adopted by the investigating committee of the American Congress into the gambling activities of one Nelson, Judge David Bezelon remarked caustically thus: "Nelson's freedom of choice has been dissolved in a brooding omnipresence of compulsion. The Committee threatened prosecution for contempt if he refused to answer, for perjury if he lied and for gambling acti- vities if he told the truth." Fourthly, inasmuch as a Commission may receive hearsay evidence at second--hand or third--hand, its ﬁndings on the conduct of persons involved in the case may cause irretrievable damage to those persons and may even ruin them for life. In this connection, a passage from the speech in the House of Commons of Sir Alfred Butt who was involved in the "Budget Leakage Inquiry"? in 1936 may be quoted: "I would as}: right hon. and hon. Members to visualise the position in which I now ﬁnd myself. I have been condemned, and apparently I must suffer for the rest of my life from a ﬁnding against which there is no appeal, upon evidence which apparently does not justify a trial, and there is now no method open to me by which I can bring the true and full facts, before a jury of my fellow-men . . . . .. If any good may come from this, the most miserable moment of my life, I can only hope that my position may do some- thing to prevent any other person in this country being subject to the humiliation and wretchedness which I have suffered, without trial, without appeal and without redress." Finally, in a number of cases inquiries may not result in any tangible results. Thus in England no prosecution seems to have ever been launched as a result of a tribunal of inquiry and the position seems to be hardly different in our country. 1Par].iamentary Debates, Lords, 1958-59, Vol. 216, pp. 454-478. '-'Parliamentary Debates, Commons (1958-59), Vol. 600, John Waters (Tribunal or Inquiry), page 206. Jusnﬁmtion for our Act. 3. In the light of che_£9regoing discusﬁism' 3% '°bde'°°*" and drawbacks of inquiries by Commissions, It 8003195 pertinent to consider-- (1) Whether the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 should at all be on the Statute Book? (2) If so, what safeguards should be provided to mitigate the rigour of the Act? Our answer to the ﬁ_rst question is_in the aiﬁrmative. Tlﬁe Lord Chancellor, Viscount Kilmuir, in 1113 reply to 't 63 debate in the House of Lords in the Waters case made a spirited and vigorous defence of the English Act In the following words2:-- "Let me state quite shortly the arguments for some such procedure as the present. The sanction of the public inquiry is necessary on occasions for the purpose of maintaining a high standard of public adrrlinistration and, indeed, of public life. The modern system has developed in consequence of the inadequacies of the machinery of inquiry by Select Committee on the one hand and the limitations of the ordinary process of law on the other . . . . .. The ordinary processes of law are geared to a charge or claim brought by one person against another. They do not ﬁt when it is necessary to discover what has actually happened before the responsibility of or between individuals can arise, and, as has been discussed earlier in this debate, there are other ﬁelds, such as wreck inquiries, inquiries into accidents, courts of inquiry in the Services and the Committee of Privileges of the House of Commons, where the inquisitorial procedure is a necessary con- comitant of their work. In all those cases the question of discovering what has actually happened is of prime importance . . . . .. After the true facts have been found and stated it may be necessary to stigmatise conduct which although not a criminal offence or a civil wrong, falls short of the requisite standards of our public life. It may be necessary to kill harrnful rumours which are found to be unjustiﬁed. It may be necessary----and this I am sure was very much in the minds of the Govern- ment who introduced this measure----to restore public conﬁdence in public conduct and administration. These ends may well be of such importance to the life of the nation as to justify means which inflict hardship on individuals." This seems to be a suiﬁcient justiﬁcation for an Act like the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 . The arguments set out by the Lord Chancellor in defence of the English Act apply equally to the Indian Act. It is true that in some 1Para. 7, supra, '-'Pal' t Dbt,Ld,1- Trjbunzé-ﬂ1_ar2$:;1e:r£70'e7: es or s 958 59, Vol. 216, The Waters 1 cases, the Government does not take any action on the report of a. Cornrnission of Inquiry. But that does not mean that the inquiry has not been useiui. The Com- mission either exonerates the persons involved in the inquiry or holds them guilty. In either case the inquiry serves a useful purpose. In the ﬁrst case, the inquiry sets at rest some ugly rumours which led to the appointment of the Commission. In the second case, the guilty persons are exposed to the public eye. A prosecution is not the only method of punishing persons who pollute the pure springs of ubilic administration. Many persons would prefer to s er a sentence in secret rather than face the public with their dark deeds. The glaring publicity which attaches to such inquiries is both its strength and its weak- ness. Such publicity exposes the wrong-doers to the public eye and there lies its strength. Sometimes, however, such publicity results in unrnerited mud-slinging on some innocent persons who are denied the safeguards of the ordinary judicial procedure to vindicate themselves and there lies its weakness. But no human system of justice can be perfect. Cases of miscarriage of justice are not unknown in the ordinary courts of law. 9. As regards the second question} we feel that in a matter like this, there should be a just balance between the interests of the general public and the rights of individuals, between the claims of the State and civil liheI".'.ies. The fundamental rights enshrined in our Consti- tution will have little meaning if they can be trampled upon by a law which, though conforming to the letter of the Constitution, yet violates its spirit. In order that the special procedure envisaged in the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 does not work any hardship on citizens, there should be some safeguards. The great American Judge, Mr. Justice Frankfurter has observed?' "the history of liberty has largely been the history of procedural safeguards". We may again quote from the speech of the Lord Chan- cellor, Viscount Kilmuir, in the House of Lords in the Debate on the Waters case in which he suggested some safeguardsaz -- "Parliament and the Government should be exceed- ingly char-3r of using this procedure when another remedy is open, for the inquiry may hopelessly pre- judice subsequent proceedings. Yet, again, one has to set against this difﬁculty the public asset of confidence in the police or the civil service or the functioning by Government which it may be vital to re-establish. 1See para. 3 supra. 2"GoverI1m-ant by Investigation" by Alan Barth, Chapter VI, 011 "Self Incrirnination", page 112 3Par1iarne.-ntar3r Debates, Lords Vol. iilﬁ "The Waters 'I'ribuua]". Pp. §'I4--1'75. 4'77 and 4'73. Some general points cza- mincd . Power of Government to appoint Commissions 5110 M013. Contempt of Commission. 8 That is the only sort of exception and I think that if noble Lords consider it, they will be inclined to agree . . . . .. The procedure should be invoked only for weighty and important matters, for it is only then that the sacriﬁce on the part of the individual can be fairly demanded . . . . .. It will help if the Tribunal, when it has to consider complicated matters, bears i.n mind two points and has two objectives: ﬁrst, to get cleared what actually happened; secondly, as soon as it appears possible that responsibility may rest on a particular person, to secure that this person should have an opportunity of dealing with any point---I repeat, any point---which may be thought to tell against him." 10. Having come to the conclusion' that the Commissions of Inquiry Act with proper safeguards is a necessary piece of legislation, we proceed to consider some general points in relation to the Act. 11. First, it has been suggested to us that Government should not have the power to appoint a Commission of Inquiry suo mom." There is a great advantage if the Government, before it appoints a Commission of Inquiry, obtains a mandate from the Legislature. The obvious advantage is that in such a case the responsibility for determining whether a matter is a deﬁnite matter of public importance will shift from the executive to the elected representatives of the people. On the other hand, the disadvantage is that in an urgent case when the legis--. lature is not in session the Government will not be able to act immediately (e.g., when there is an accident which requires immediate investigation). Further, there may be cases in which it may be necessary to observe the utmost secrecy until certain facts have been ascertained by a Com- mission of Inquiry. On the whole, we do not think a change in the law is called for. 12. (1) Secondly, it has been suggested to us by Judges who have presided over some Commissions of Inquiry that the Commission should have power to punish for contempt. It seems that in the past, some members of Commissions of Inquiry have been subjected to scurrilous attacks in the press and elsewhere but the Commissions have not been able to punish them. It is contended that no Com» mission of Inquiry can effectively function if its authority is iiouted or irresponsible comments are made in the press and elsewhere during the course of the inquiry on the per- sonnel of the Commission or on the subject-matter of the Inquiry. We are, however, faced in this matter with a Constitutional difficulty. In the case of Dclmici v. Mr. 1Paras. 3-9. supra. 3'I'his relates to section 3(1) . 9 Justice Tendolkar and others} the Supreme Court has held that a Commission appointed under the Act does not per»- form any judicial functions. In the Words of the Supreme Court, "The Commission has no power of adjudication in the sense of passing an order which can be enforced proprio vigore. A clear distinction must, on the authorities, be drawn between a decision which, by itself, has no force and no penal effect and a decision which becomes enforceable immediately or which may become enforceable by some action being taken. There- fore, as the Commission we are concerned with is merely to investigate and record its ﬁndings and recommendations without having any power to enforce them, the inquiry or report cannot be looked upon as a judicial inquiry in the sense of its being an exercise of judicial function properly so called . . . . .." (2) A Commission under this Act merely ascertains facts. It does not decide any dispute. There are no parties before the Commission. There is no 'lie'. As Lord Shawcross has said in the case of the analogous Tribunal in England, "the procedure of the Tribunal is inquisitional. rather than accusatorial". In fact, it has already been held by the Nagpur High Court in the case of Rcrjwade v. Hasscm2 that a Commission appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 , is not a court within the meaning of section 3 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1952.3 (3) Article 19 of the Constitution guarantees to every citizen the right to freedom of speech and expression, but under clause (2) thereof it is open to the Legislature to make a law imposing reasonable restrictions on such a right in relation, among other matters, to contempt of court. If, however, the Commission is not a court, the relevant entry, namely, entry 14 of the Concurrent List, will not be available to Parliament to make any such law. The expression "court" in relation to contempt of court,. as it occurs both in article 19 (2) and in entry 14 of the Concurrent List, must be given its well-accepted meaning and it would not, therefore, be open to Parliament to convert what is a mere fact--ﬁnding body into a court for the purpose of punishing contempt of it. (4) We are aware that section 5(4) commences with the words "The Commission shall be deemed to be a Civil Court". These words are intended to make it clear that section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is attracted. 1(1959) S.C_R. 279, 293; A.I.R. 1958 SB. 538. 2A.I.R. (1954) Nag. 71. 3See also Braj Ncmdan Sinha v. Jyoti Namin . (1959) 2. S.C.R. 955 where it was held that a somewhat similar body appointed under the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1950 , is not a court within the meaning of the Contempt of Court's Act, 1952. 10 (5) While we cannot constitute the Commission into a Court for the purposes of contempt, we feel at the same time, that some provision should be made to protect members of the Commission from irresponsible and scurrilous attacks. Section 5(4) of the Act already provides for the punishment of certain offences under the Indian Penal Code committed in the View or presence of the Commission. We think that a provision should be made' for punishing persons who by spoken words or words intended to be read, make or publish any statement or do any other act calculated to bring the Commission or any member thereof into disrepute. And such a provision could be related to entries 1 and 2 of the Concurrent List. It will not be possible to go beyond this, and to make a provision in wide terms on the lines of section 1(2) of the English Act, sections 18 and 24 of the Royal Commission on Espionage Act, 1954 (Australia), section 6- -----1G of the Ho al Commission Act,19ﬂ2--1933 (Australia), sections 12 2 ) to 12 (4) of the (Ceylon) Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1943, or section 5(1) of the Public Inquiries Act, Alberta (Canada), (R.S. Alberta 1955 Ch. 258). In our opinion, such a provision which punishes contempt of the Com- mission -Will be hit by clause (2) of article 19 of the Constitution. (6) We are aware that the offence of defamation is already punishable under sections 499 to 502 of the Indian Penal Code. But, in spite of such provisions, virulent attacks have been made on Commissions and their mem- bersa-a fact to which our attention has been drawn by several distinguished persons who had served on various Commissions of Inquiry appointed under the Act. We think that if the Act itself creates a specific offence of the kind suggested, the attention of the public will be focussed on the penal consequences of defamatory attacks on a Commission or its members. We consider it urmecessary to encumber the proposed provision with the various Exceptions and Explanations contained in section 499 of the Indian Penal Code, because we think that the clause, without the Exceptions and Explanations, will be inter- preted by the courts in a reasonable manner. (7) At one stage, we were inclined to include, in the new provision, acts likely to lower the authority of a Commission or its members or to interfere with any of its lawful processes. On further consideration, however, we felt that the provisions in the Indian Penal Code , Chapter X, sections 172 to 190, dealing with contempts of the lawful authority of public servants, (which would be attracted in the case of members of Commissions also, who under the Act, are public servants,] would meet the requirements of the case. We, therefore, decided to leave "out those matters. _. ._,___...._..___.._--_..._.-..----/ 1See Appendix I, section" 9' :3,» ss'ii§i£:6§ed_ 11 13. Thirdly, it has been suggested to us that it should Agplication be made clear whether . the Indian Evidence Act, 1'€i72§nd,-an E,§,._ applies to proceedings before a Commission of Inqu1'ry.d.=n¢.-, Ag, The position in England under the Tribunals of Inquiry £872. (Evidence) Act, 1921 is stated by Keeton as follows':--- "In sifting the facts concerning the existence of rumours giving rise to the inquiry, all evidence is relevant and this part of the inquiry is simply fact- finding. When the question of the involvement of a particular person in a particular transaction is under consideration, however, the Tribunal restricts itself to the facts admissible under the normal rule of evidence," "We recommend that the same practice should be followed in our country also. We, however, do not recommend that any statutory provision in this behalf should be made in the Act, because such a rigid provision may defeat the very object of the Act, namely, to find out the truth. 14. Fourthly, a question has been raised as to the Procedure of manner in which the Act should regulate the procedure to C°mK"5="°n- he followed. While the English Act empowers the Tri- bunal itself to regulate its procedure, the Indian Act leaves it to the Central Government to make rules for regulating the procedure of a Commission of Inquiry and subject to such rules the Commission of Inquiry may itself settle its procedure. The question of the procedure to be followed arose prominently in the inquiry held in England in. 1936 into the budget leakage. The procedure was ﬁnally settled" by Mr. Justice Lynskey in the inquiry held in 1948. In the Mundhra Inquiry earlier referred to", Chagla, C. J. indicated the procedure which he proposed to follow in the following terms:--- "I will examine the witnesses who come before the Commission. The Attorney-General will then question them and supplement the evidence in any manner that he thinks proper, Counsel who are appearing for other interests will then have the right of examining these witnesses and I will ﬁnally put any other question which I may think necessary to the witnesses. It will be open to the counsel appear- ing for the different interests to call for any evidence they think proper, and after all the evidence is offered, counsel may address me on the evidence." Wlliee-ton. Trial by Tribunal (1950) Page 13. ?See Keeton; "Trial by Tribunal", (1960) Pages 16-17. "See para. 4, supra. 140 M of L-~3 Costs. 12 There are two rules' made under section 12 of the Act which contain important provisions regarding procedure. Rules 4 and 5 read as fo1lows:-- "4. If, at any stage of the inquiry, the Commission--- (a) considers it necessary to inquire into the conduct of any person, or (b) is of the opinion that the reputation of any person is likely to be pre-judicially aﬁected by the inquiry, the Commission shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the inquiry and to produce evidence in his defense. 5. The Central Government, every person referred to in rule 4 and, with the permission of the Commis- sion, any other person whose evidence is recorded under rule 3- (ct) may cross-examine a witness other than a witness produced by it or him; (b) may address the court,' and (c) may be represented before the Commis- sion by a legal practitioner, or, with the consent of the Commission, by any other person,". We think that since these rules embody the fundamental principles of natural justice and safeguard the rights of individuals, they should be incorporated in the Act itself.' In England, it has been suggested that instead of the Attorney--General, who is intimately connected with the Govermnent, an independent counsel should assist the Tribunal of Inquiry. We express no opinion on this ques- tion, but we see no reason why the highest law ofﬁcer of the Government cannot take an objective view of the matter. 15. The ﬁfth question raised relates to costs, which may be examined from two aspects--- {:2} costs of witnesses; (in) costs of persons whose conduct is in question. So far as costs of Witnesses are concerned, we are suggest- ing a provision in the rule-making section." As regards costs of a person whose conduct is in question, it is con- tended that the State should pay his costs if he succeeds and conversely he should be made to pay the costs if the findings are against him. It is observed that 'it seems unfair that persons should either be put to a very 'IS-ee rules 4 and 5, Central C-Dn1n'L1'SS'.'lU.:--1g of Inquiry. (Proce- dure) Rules 1960, issued on the 7th May, 196-{}_ 3See Appendix I, section 8(1) to 8(3) as" proposed. 3Appendix I. section 12 as proposed to be amended. '*5 lr 13 considerable expense of defending themselves or run the risk of things going against them because they cannot afford the costs'. It is further contended that the provision about the payment of costs would act as some sort of a brake on irresponsible, time-wasting and obstructive tactics. This question has been raised in England also, but, so far as we have been able to gather, no ﬁnal decision has been reached. Neither the English Act nor the Australian nor the Canadian Act provides for costs. The reasons are not far to seek. In any inquiry of the nature under considera- tion which is held in the public interest, there are no parties. The Tribunal is a purely fact-ﬁnding body and -does not adjudicate upon the rights of any persons. In these circumstances, we do not think that any provision should be made in the Act in respect of costs. 16. Lastly it has been suggested that the Act should Publication provide that the Report of a Commission of Inquiry should 05 "CPU"- be published as soon as it is submitted to the Government. 'VVhethe.r a Report should be published or not will depend upon the nature of the inquiry and the Report made to the Government. There may be certain cases in which it may not be advisable to publish the Report. We,,therefore, think that this matter should be left to the discretion of the Government. Where a Commission of Inquiry has been appointed in pursuance of a resolution of the Legis- lature, We have no doubt that the Report will be laid on the Table of the Legislature. In other cases, we do not think that a rigid provision should be made that the Report should invariably be laid before the Legislature. Whenever necessary, the Legislature will be able to assert itself and beyond this it is not necessary to go. 17. The question as to the manner in which a Cornmis-- Assistance -sion of Inquiry may be assisted in the matter of investiga~ I9 C0ﬂm1i=- tion may also be considered. In England. there is a *""" f" I "Treasury Solicitor with a permanent staff who works f',:',,?;":§;:t;2,,,_ under the directions of the Tribunals constituted under the English Act . The Treasury Solicitor performs the functions of investigation which in a criminal case are per- formed by the police. He Sifts the facts and ﬁnds out What witnesses should be examined and collects other material "which will be useful to the Tribunal. It has been suggest- ed that a similar machinery should be set up in this coun- try. We commend this suggestion to the Government. "The setting up of such a machinery will relieve the Com- missions of Inquiry of a great deal of preliminary and routine work over which it should not waste its time. 18. With these general observations we now proceed to Detailed examine in detail the main provisions of the Act. =3»-"1'"1'I!'1tI'011 of Act. 19. The Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 , falls under Section3(z) _... entry 9-4, List I (Inquiries for the purpose of any of the Relevant "matters in List I} and entry 45, List In (Inquiries for t11e"=3'-".1'"i"° purposes of any of the matters in List II or List III), in game" Section 3(1) - Gonstitu. tional vali- dity. Section 3 (:).- er resolution should be by both Houses of the Legis- laturc. 14 the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The two entries between themselves cover inquiries into any aspect of the matters included in any of the three legislative Lists, and thus the scope of the matters which can be inquired i.nto by the Commission appointed under the Act is wide and extensive.' 20. Section 3 authorises the appropriate Government to appoint a Commissio_n to inquire into any matter of deﬁnite public importance. And where the Central Government appointed a Commission to inquire into the affairs of certain companies and ﬁrms in the interests of the investing public, the constitutional validity of section 3 was chalieng- ed in the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Krishna Dalmia earlier referred to." It was argued that Parliament in authorising the appointment of a Commission of Inquiry, and the Government in appointing a Conunission had arrogated to themselves judicial powers which do not in the very nature of things belong to their respective domains, which must be purely legislative and executive respectively. This contention was negatived by the Court on the ground that the Commission merely investigates facts and records its ﬁnding, and even if it were to make recommendations, it has no power to enforce them. An inquiry before a Commission is not a judicial inquiry, because no "judicial functions" properly so called are exercised by it, and in the circumstances there could be no question of usurpation by Parliament or the Government of the powers of the judicial organs of the Union. The second attack was based on the ground that the Act conferred upon the Government an arbitrary and uncon- trolled discretion as regards the appointment of a Com- mission and was therefore void under article 14 of the Constitution. This argument was also negatived by the Court by pointing out that the power to appoint a Com- mission is vested only in the Government and, further, such an appointment can be made only where a deﬁnite matter of public importance required to be looked into and not for any other purpose. Section 3 is therefore constitutionally proper. 21. We have discussed' elsewhere the question whether the power of the Government to appoint a Commission should be restricted to cases where a resolution in that behalf is passed by the appropriate legislative authority, and have come to the conclusion that it is neither necessary nor desirable to fetter the discretion of the Government in any way. On the other hand, while the existing Act, 1Roin Dalmia v. Mr. Justice S. R. Tendolkar and §tEerg3(1959) S.C.R., 279_ 289; (1958), S.C.A., 754, 765; A.I.R. 1958 . . 8. 2Para. 19 supra. 3See para. 11, sup:-a._ ., F u 15 in our opinion, correctly provides that Government should appoint a C'omm.ission if a resolution in that behalf is passed by the appropriate legislative authority, we see no justification for excluding the Council of States _or the Legislative Council in States which have two chambers from the purview of the section. The only reason given for conﬁning the power to pass resolutions to the House of the People and to the Legislative Assemblies is the fact that under the Constitution the Ministers are responsible to these Houses. It was, however, conceded that if the Council of States or the Legislative Council were to pass a similar resolution, Government would be bound to give the greatest possible consideration to it and it was extre- mely unlikely that the resolution would not be given effect to. On the whole, we think there is no justiﬁcation for making a distinction between the two Houses of the Legislature wherever two Houses exist. We therefore recommend that wherever the Legislature resolves that a Commission of Inquiry should be appointed, the resolution should be by both Houses of the Legislature. 22. Under section 3(1) , read with the deﬁnition of Scction3(r).. 'appropriate 'Government' the power to appoint a Com- P09-S{b1€_ II1lSSl0Il is given to,----- (i) the Central Government, if the inquiry is in §,';:nb,"3";n_ connection with any matter relatable to any of the m1a.-my matters enumerated in List I, List II or List III in the State Seventh Schedule to the Constitution; G0'-Tm' mcnts' Com- (ii) the State Government, if the inquiry is in m'55i°"3- connection with any matter relatable to any of the matters enumerated in List II or List III. It would be noticed that so far as List II and List III are concerned, both the Central Government and the State Governments can appoint a Commission of Inquiry. The Act , however, eliminates any possible conflict or over- lapping in Jurisdiction by expressly providing that where a Commission has been appointed to inquire into any matter by the Central Government, no State Government is to appoint another Commission to inquire into the sain- matter so long as the Commission appointed by the Centrar Government is functioning except with the approval of the Central Government. Conversely, where a Commission has been appointed by a State Government to inquire into any matter, the Central Government is also not to appoint another Commission to inquire into the same matter so long as the_Com_m1ss1on appointed by the State Government 1S functioning, unless the Central Government is of opinion that the scope of the inquiry should be extended to two or more States. Here, there is an omission, namely, the Act does not indicate what is to happen if, after the appoint- ment of a Commission by a State Government, the Central Government decides that the scope of the inquiry should be extended to two or more States and accordinglv appoints Section 3(I) -- Scope of functions of Commis- sion. 16 a Commission. In our opinion, in such a situation the Commission appointed by the State Government should cease to function,' particularly as the inquiry is to be made into the same matter. We recommend that an express provision in this behalf may be made. 23. Section 3(1) states that the functions which can be entrusted to a Commission are two-fold, namely,-- (at) making an inquiry into any deﬁnite matter of public importance, and (b) performing such functions . . . . ..as may be speciﬁed in the notiﬁcation appointing the Commission. 24. (a) An argument was advanced in Ram Krishna Dalmic v. Mr. Justice Tendotlcar and others2 that while Parliament could make a law with respect to "inquiries" under the relevant legislative entries, it could not make a law conferring a power to perform any function other than the power to hold an inquiry. Further, it was contended that the law which the appropriate legislature is empowered to make under the relevant legislative entries relating to inquiries must be with reference to inquiries for the purpose of legislation and not for administrative purposes. The Supreme Court rejected these arguments and pointed out that an inquiry under the Act was not limited in its scope or ambit to future legislative purposes. So far as the expression 'performing such functions' was concerned, it was assumed that such functions would be functions necessary for or ancillary to the purposes of the Commis- sion. It is desirable to make the position clear in the Act and we recommend accordingly." (b) In the above mentioned case, the notiﬁcation appointing the Commission, after directing an inquiry to be made into the affairs of certain companies and ﬁrms and after stating in detail the facts to be investigated, called upon the Commission to inquire into and make recommendations in respect of the following, among other matters, namely (item 10), "any irregularities, fraud or breach of trust or action in disregard of honest commercial practices . . . . ..in respect of the companies and ﬁnns whose affairs are investigated by the Commission which may come to the knowledge of the Commission and the action which, in the opinion of the Commission, should be taken as and by way of securing redress or punishment or to act as a preventive in future cases". 1The provision that when a State Cormnission is functioning the Central Government should not appoint a Commission unless the scope of the inquiry is to extend to two or more States was not included in the Bill as originally introduced but was inserted by the Select Committee. 91959 S.C.R. 279; I958 S.C.A. 754; AIR. 1953 SC. 538. 3See Appendix I,. Section 3 (1) as proposed. 137 (c) It was held by the Supreme Court that, having regard to the fact that the Commission had no judicial powers and its report could only be recommend-atory, there was no point in the Commission making recommenda- tions for any action "as and by way of securing redress or punishment" regarding wrongs already done or committed because the redress or punishment, if any, for such wrongs has to be given or imposed by courts of law in their own discretion and without being in any was inﬂuenced by the view of any person or body, however august or high- powered that person or body might be. Accordingly the Court held that any recommendation about action to be taken as and by way of securing redress or punishment could not be said to be necessary for or ancillary to the purpose of the Commission and such a direction to the Commission was outside the scope of the Act. This, how- ever, relates to the actual speciﬁcation of the functions of the Commission and does not require any amendment in the Act. 25. In :1 case decided by the Andhra Pradesh High Court1 it was held that if the notiﬁcation under section 3 appointing a Commission does not specify the time within which the Commission has to complete its inquiry and if the mistake is not rectiﬁcd by a subsequent notiﬁcation? then, until the defect is cured, the Commission is debarred from functioning under the notiﬁcation notwithstanding the fact that the notiﬁcation is not invalid. The Com- mission, it was observed, would be in a state of suspended animation. This decision shows that it is desirable that the appropriate Government appointing a Commission should specify the time within which the Commission is to conclude its work. The Act , however, does not require any amendment in this behalf. The only clariﬁcation we are recommending-" is that the period within which a report is to be submitted may be extended from time to time by notiﬁcation. 26. Judging from the experience gained in the working of one or two Commissions of Inquiry, we consider it desirable to provide expressly for the ﬁlling up of vacancies or for an increase in the number of members whenever . the Government thinks it necessary or expedient to do so. We recommend an amendment to section 3 in this behalf} 27. Section 4 authorises the Commission to summon and enforce the attendance of any person. It does not, how- ever, specify the territorial jurisdiction of the Commission in this behalf, and consequentially, it may be argued that the restriction under Order 16, Rule 19 of the Code of Civil V. T. Neetaclari Rao A_I.R. 1959, Andhra 1Nm'a.ya:nctdoss Pradesh 148, 153. 2Compare Ram Krishna Dr1Imia 's case 1959 S.C.R. 279, 312. 3See Appendix I Section 3(4) . 4See Appendix I, Section 3(3) as proposed. Sc siion 3- Fixlng of time. Section 3- Fiﬂing up of vacancies, etc. Section 4- Personal attendance of witnesses. Section 5(2) . Section 5(3) . 18 Procedure, 1908, would be attracted, since, under section 4 , a Commission, in summoning witnesses, has the same powers as a civil court. On this reasoning, a Commission would not be competent to summon a Witness residing at a distance longer than 200 miles from its headquarters. We consider that the limitation imposed on civil courts by this rule should not apply to Commissions appointed under the Act, in view of the different nature of the work assigned to a Commission of Inquiry. We accordingly recommend, that a Commission appointed under the Act should have jurisdiction to summon a witness from any part of the territories to which the Act extends. Rules under the Act1 will secure that necessary travelling and other expenses are paid to Witnesses who are summoned under the Act. 28. With reference to section 5(2) empowering a Commission to require any person to furnish information on a matter under inquiry, a question has been raised as to whether the persons so required can be punished for failure to give information, having regard, in particular, to the decision' in Ali Mahomed v. Emperor .' In that case the members of the Wakf Board had not been declared to be public servants by the Act constituting the Board. Further, the Act provided a separate punishment for failure to furnish information. There is, however, no objection to the position being clariﬁed by stating in sub-section (2) that any person required to furnish information shall be bound to furnish such information, so as to attract the penal provisions of the Indian Penal Code in this behalf. It has been suggested that a speciﬁc provision should be inserted in this sub~section (on the lines of section 175 , Criminal Procedure Code), to the elfect that a rson shall not be required to disclose information W ich might incriminate him. We may point out that the obligation to disclose information under this sub-section is subject to any privilege available under the law for the time being in force. It would thus appear that no special privilege is conferred by this section, but any privilege conferred by any other law would be available under the sub-section. 29. Section 5(3) authorises the Commission or any authorised gazetted oiﬁcer to enter any building or place where any books of account or other documents relating to the subject-matter of the inquiry may be found and to seize such books or documents, subject to the provisions of sections 102 and 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, in so far as they may be applicable. In Na-rcyancdoss v. T. N eelcclri Root already referred to," an argument was 1See Appendix I, section 12(2) , as proposed. 2See Appendix II, Notes to s. 5 (2) for detailed discussion. 372 I.A. 226; AIR 1945 RC. 4. 'A.I.R. I959 Andhra Pradesh, 148, 152. 'See para. 25, supra. '19 advanced that this provision conferred an uncontrolled and arbitrary power of entry and seizure on Commissions of Inquiry in general. Further , in that case the Com- mission had been appointed to inquire into the wide-spread mismanagement of the properties of Hindu religious and charitable trusts created for public purposes and it was therefore contended that there was also a violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed by articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution. The Court pointed out that the sub-section gave no such sweeping powers, but merely authorised the speciﬁed ofﬁcers to enter buildings or places where the relevant books or documents could be found, and the power of seizure was hedged in by several restrictions or safe- guards, including those contained in sections 102 and 103 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. It is not necessary to disturb the section on this point. 30. (1) We have discussed elsewhere' the question as to the extent to which protection can be secured to Commis- sions of Inquiry in respect of scurrilous and scandalous attacks on them. Section 5 may accordingly be amended by the insertion of a sub-section" making it an offence to publish any statement or do any other act calculated to bring the Commission or any member thereof into disrepute. (2) Certain procedural questions have been raised in connection with this offence. It has been suggested to us, that in view of the status of the members of the Commis- sion who generally include a Judge of a High Court or the Supreme Court, the offence should be triable by a High Court exclusively. It was further suggested that in the trial of the proposed new offence the personal attendance of members of the Commission should be dispensed with and that an Exception should be made to section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, which requires the examination of the complainant. Further, it was suggested, the offence should be triable as a summons case and a provision should be made on the lines of the proviso to section 244(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 which confers on the court a discretion to hear the complainant or not. We have given careful consideration to all these suggestions. We feel that, taking all the circumstances into consideration, the proce- dure already prescribed in section 198B of the Code of Cri- minal Procedure. 1898, in respect of defamation of high dig- nitaries of the State (including the President and the Vice- President) and public servants generally, would be suitable -for this offence also. Section 198B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, Chapter XXI of 502----a group of the President, Vice--President etc., provides that any offence falling under the Indian Penal Code (sections 499 to sections relating to defamation) against shall be triable by a 1See paragraph 12, supra. 2See Appendix I, s. 5(5) as proposed. :40 Mof L -4 Section 5- -- (:Ul'1lL'Tl'|[l1 of C.unmi:;-- 5 ion. Section 6- 20 Court of Session. The section also lays down a special pro- cedure for the trial of such offences. The Sessions Court can take cognizance of the offence without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon the complaint in writing of the Public Prosecutor. The Court may also, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refrain from examining the person against whom the offence is committed. Since a special procedure thus already exists for an analogous offence, we feel that there is no strong case for creating a new procedure by making the offence triable by a High Court exclusively and thus laying down a different proce- dure for more or less similar offences. 31. Section 6 provides that no statement made by a [,,C,.,m;,mgng person in the course of giving evidence before the Commis- sfatclncnts. sion shall subject him to or be used against him in a crimi- nal proceeding. ln this connection, a question was raised as to whether a person can claim protection under clause (3) of article 20 of the Constitution at the time of answering a question put to him and the Punjab High Court answered it in the affirmative'. Subsequently, in a Supreme Court decision", it has been held by a majority that clause (3) of article 20 applies only where at the time the statement is made the person stands accused of an offence. Section 6 does not require any amendment from this point of view. It has been suggested that the protection given by sec- tion 6 to oral statements should be extended to documents. In our opinion, there is a good deal of difference between the spoken word and the written word. When dealing with inquiries into matters of deﬁnite public importance, there would appear to be very little justiﬁcation for extending protection to persons whose guilt is clear from any docu- ments in -their possession or custody. No doubt, if no such protection is extended, such evidence may not be readily forthcoming. One has therefore to balance the two consider- ations. In any event, any protection given cannot be to the same extent as is given by section 6 in the case of the spoken word. The interests of a public inquiry would not be pro- moted by the enlargement of such protection, and we ﬁnd that in many similar Acts no protection is afforded in rela- tion to the production of documents? In our country also, the practice has been to treat the spoken word differently from the written word, and to extend protection to the latter only if on the merits of the case protection i.s needed. Such protection has often been of a very limited or special Izlllen Berry 8: Co., v_ Mr. Vivian Bose, I.L.R. (1960) A.I.R. 1960 Pun. 36. 2S'tate of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu . A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 1808. -'Section 21 (3) Ontario Securities Act. {R.S.O.; 1960 (363), section 5 ]; the Evidence Act , (Canada) (R.S.C. 59, S. 5 ). Both discussed in (1962) Can. Bar Journal, February, 6, 12 to 15 (The Privilege against self incrimination). Pun. 415; 21 nature} On the whole, we think that the protection con- ferred by section 6 does not require any enlargement. 32. In our opinion, it is desirable to make it clear in the 'interests of trade that nothing in the Act shall render it compulsory for any person giving evidence to disclose any secret process of manufacture? We recommend that a new section" be inserted to that effect. 33. (1) While discussing the procedure to be followed by the Commission, we have recommended'! the incorporation of rules 4 and 5 (with suitable modiﬁcations) in the Act it- self. We recommend that section 8 be suitably amended in this behalf. (2) As regards sittings of the Commission in public or in private, the section leaves the matter to the Commission's discretion. Various suggestions have been made regarding this provision. On the one hand, it is argued that inquirie-s under the Act should always be held in public, since such inquiries relate to matters of public importance." On the other hand, it is argued that sometimes the inquiry relates to a commercial concern and that the holding of such in- quiries in public would be detrimental to the interests of such concerns. Since no uniform rule can be laid down in respect of all inquiries, and the question whether an inquiry or any part thereof should be held in public or in private will depend on the circumstances of each case, we think that the best course would be to retain the existing provision, which leaves the matter to the discretion of the Commission. A Commission would consist of responsible persons, and can be trusted to exercise its discretion in a reasonable manner. 34. Section 8 of the Act provides that the Commission may act notwithstanding the temporary absence of any member or the existence of a vacancy amongst its members. We have already proposed" an amendment to section 3 of the Act in order to make it clear that it is open to the Government to increase the number of members on the Commission at any stage of the inquiry or to ﬁll any vacancy. We now recommend,' that it may be made clear that it is not necessary for the Commission to recommence its inquiry if a change takes place in the constitution of the Commission during the pendency of an inquiry. It may, 1C3'. Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947 ; Indian Election Offences and Inquiries Act, 1920; the Capital Issues (Continuance of Control) Act, 1947. Contrast the general provision in s. 130 , Indian Evidence Act, 1872. D(5'C')f. The Royal Commission Act, Australia, 1902-1933, section 6 1 . 3See Appendix I, section 6A, 4See para. 14, supra. 5See in this connection, a Private Member's Bill introduced in the Lok Sabha on ll-5-19t'i2--to amend the Act (Bill No. 15 of 1962) (Shri D. C. Sharma). 3See para. 26, supra. 7See Appendix I, section 8A. Section 6A (New). Section 8 . Section SA (New). Section 12 . 0 her clringes. Appciidiccs. 22 however, be provided that if the services of the Chairman have ceased to be available, the Commission should not act until a new chairman is appointed. Such a provision would appear to be appropriate.' 35. The rule-making section may be amended so as to ex- -pressly provide for two topics on which rules may be made, namely, the association of persons with the Commission as assessors and the payment of travelling and other expenses to persons summoned to give evidence. 36. We have explained above the important changes which we recommend. The other matters on which we have recommended an alteration in the existing Act will appear in the Notes on Clauses." 37. In order to give a concrete shape to our proposals, we have, in Appendix I, put them in the form of draft amend- ments to the existing Act. Appendix II contains Notes on Clauses, elucidating, with reference to the draft amendments in Appendix 1, any points that may require elucidation. Appendix III contains a statement showing the Commis-- sions appointed under the Act. 1. MR. JUSTICE J. L. KAPUR, Chairman. 2. G. R. RAJAGOPAUL. ] 3. D. BASU. 4. K. G. DATAR. 5. T. K. TOPE. *6. NIREN DE. S. K. HIRANANDANI, Secretary. NEW DELHI, The 18th December, 1962. i P Members. E J 1Comparc section 5 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. '-'See Appendix 11. *Mr. Niren De has been unable to sign the Report, but he con- curs in the recommendations made therein. :2. APPENDIX 1 'Pnoi>osALs AS SHOWN IN THE FORM 01?' DRAFT AMENDMENTS TO THE EXISTING Acr. (This is a tentative draft only) Section 3 50 0f '953- For section 3 of the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as "the principal Act"), the follow- ing section shall be substituted, namely:--- "3. (1) The appropriate Government may, if it is of APP°1"*m¢"1 opinion that it is necessary so to do, and shall, if a reso~ C0mmi,,5,m__ lution in this behalf is passed by both Houses of Parlia- ment or, as the case may be, by the Legislative Assembly of the State, or, in the case of at State having a Legisla- tive Council, by both. Houses of the Legislature of the State, by notiﬁcation in the Official Gazette, appoint a Commission of Inquiry for the purpose of making an inquiry into any deﬁnite matter of public importance which shall be speciﬁed in the notiﬁcation, and perform- ing such functions, being functions necessary or inci- dental to the inquiry, ......................... .. as may be so speciﬁed ......................... ..: Provided that where any such Commission has been appointed to inquire into any matter-- (a) by the Central Government, no State Gov- ernment shal], except with the approval of the Central Government, appoint another Commission to inquire into the same matter for so long as the C0-mmission appointed by the Central Government is in existence; (b) by a State Government, the Central Gov- ernment shall not appoint another Commission to inquire into the same matter for so long as the Commission appointed by the State Government i.s in existence, unless the Central Government is of opinion that the scope of the inquiry should be ex- (2) The Commission may consist of one or more members appointed by the appropriate Government, and where the Commission consists of more than one member, one of them may appointed b the appro- priate Government as the Chairman thereo 23 I40 MofL--5 As to fixation of period' Cf. existing s. 3(1). 24 (3) The appropriate Government mar , at any stage of the inquiry by the Commission- (a) ﬁll any vacancy which may have arisen in the oﬂice of a member of the Commission. (whether consisting of one or more than one member); or (b) increase the number of members of the Commission. (4) The Commission shall complete its inquiry and make its report to the appropriate Governments within such period as may be speciﬁed by the appropriate Gov- ernment by notiﬁcation in the Official Gazette, or within such further period as that Government may by like notiﬁcation specify. - Section 4 T0 section 4 of the principal Act, the following Explana- tion shall be added, namely:--- "E.rplanation.--For the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits of the jurisdic- tion of the Commission shall be the limits of the terri- tories to which this Act e.7ctends.". Section 5 In section 5 of the principal Act,---- (a) in sub-section (1), after the word, ﬁgure and brackets "sub--section (5)", the words, ﬁgures and brackets "sub-section (6) or sub-section (7)" shall be inserted; _ (b) in sub-section (2), the following words shall be inserted at the end, namely:---- "and any person so required shall be bound to furnish such information", (o) sub-section (5) shall be re-numbered as sub- section (7), and before that sub--section as so re--number- ed, the following subsections shall be inserted, namely:------ "{5} If any person, by words either spoken or intended to be read, makes or publishes any state- ment or does any other act which is calculated to bring the Commission or any member thereof into disrepute, he shall be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to two years or with ﬁne or with both. . (ii) The provisions of section 198-B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, shall apply in relation to an offence under sub-section (5) as they apply in relation to an oﬁence referred to in sub-section (1) of the said section 198-B, subject to the modiﬁcation 5 of 1898. 25 that no complaint in respect of such 0ﬂ'€'H»C? Ska" be 'made by the Public Prosecutor except with the previous sanction---- (a) in the case of a Commission or member of a Commission appointed by the Central f Government, of that Government; (b) in the case of a Commission, or a mem- ber of a Commission appointed by the State a Government, of that State Government.''. 7 . ' Section 6A (New) After section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, namely:--~ "HA. Nothing in this Act shall make it compui- Secret Pro- sory for any person giving evidence before the Com- g=35d,j::*I';_e'&" mission to disclose any secret process of manufacture". '3 ' " ' Section 8 For section 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, namely,- "3. (1) If, at any stage of the inquiry, the Co-mmis- Procedure to sion considers it necessary to inquire -into the conduct 3' tﬁglgﬁ of any person or is of opinion that the reputation of any ,,.fi,_s,-,;,,,_ person is likely to be prejudicially aﬂected by the inquiry, the Commission shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the inquiry and producing evidence in his defence: Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apcrly where the credit of a witnesses is being impeache . (2) The appropriate Government, every person referred to in sub-Section (1) and, with the permission of the Commission, any other person whose evidence is recorded by the Co¢nmissiOn,--- (a) may cross-examine any person appearing before the Commission. other than a. person produc- ed by it or him as a witness; (b) may address the Commission. (3) The a%ropriate Government, every person re- ferred to in so -section (1) and, with the permission of the Commission, any other person whose evidence is recorded by the Commission may be represented before the Commission by a legal practitioner or, with the permission of the Commission, by any other person. (4) Subject to the provisions contained in this Act and to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Commission shall have power to regulate its own proce- dure (including thepower to fix the places and times of its sittings and to decide whether to sit in public or in private).. .. ..................... . ." 26 Section 8A (New) After Séiftion 8 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, nameIy:-- {y3°,IJ':i';;tr'=:-<r=_t . "as. (1) Where the Commission _co'fr,si,sts of two or mp," by waefrrabers, tt may acttﬁotwzthst-lahdtng the absence reason of 0 e 'LT"m(11't or any 0 er mem er or any vacancy vacancy or among its--members: °h*ns ' . . . c_0nsu'EulP _Prmnded that, :3' the approprtate Government "Om 'notiﬁes the Commission that the services of the Chair- man have ceased to be aoatlable, the Commission. shall not act. unless a new Chairman is appointed, (2) Where during the course of an inquiry before a Commission, a change has taken place in the constitu- ' t-ion of-the Commission by reason of any mean hav- tng beam ﬁlled or by an increase in the num er of members of the Commission or for any other reason, it shall not be necessary for the Commission to com- mence the inquiry a)'resh.". Section 12 In section 12 of the principal Act,---- " ta} sub-section (2)--- {t) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, name-1y:-- "{aa) the association with the Commission. as assessors of persons having special know- ledge of any matter relevant to the inquiry, to assist and advise 1'.t;" (it) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, nam-e1y,-- "(c-1) the travelling and other expenses payable to persons summoned by the Commis- sion to give evidence before it." (b) after sub-section (2), the following subsection shall be inserted, name1y:-- "(3) Every rule made by the Central Govern- ment under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period, of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or -in two sueessive sessions and, if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so Laid or the session tmmedtately following, both Houses agree in mak- ing any modiﬁcation in the "ale 0?' both Houses agree that the rate should not be made, the rate shall thereafter have eﬂzect only in such modiﬁed form or be of no e'ﬁ'ect_. as the case may be; so, however, that any such modiﬁcation or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any- thing previously done under that *ru.te.". APPENDIX II Norss ON CLAUSES Section 3 It has been provided that where the appointment is to 1§n"a°i:i"';a§,'E'U' be in pursuance of the resolution of Parliament or State Resolution of Legislature, the resolution should be of both the Houses.' both Houses. Necessary change has been made. The general question of the Government's power to appoint a Commission suo mom has been dealt with." The notiﬁcation constituting the Commission should 5'3'§""" 30% specify the matter to be inquired into. It is considered that the Act should contain an express provision on the subject. Necessary change has been made. The reasons for making an amendment in respect of the Section 3(1) words "performing such functions" have been already mam P3135- - "P if ' Elven-" suéi. 'E.';'.il'1'g tions ". There is a small verbal point in connection with section section_3(_1), 3(1), main paragraph, which may be dealt with. "and Within such time." The appropriate Government can appoint a Commission of Inquiry "for the purpose of making an inquiry into any deﬁnite matter of public importance and performing such functions and within such time as may be speciﬁed in the notiﬁcation... . ". The intention obviously is that the inquiry should be completed within the speciﬁed time. In order to make the intention clear, small verbal changes have been made. In section 3(1) , main para, the words "the Commission 5;_ 3(1) . ' . . " . , ' so appointed shall make the 1nqu1ry, etc. have been om1t- mam para. ted, because it is considered unnecessary to make any such 0b1'33"°f1 - - L hold the mandatory prov1s1on." I'r'lquiry_ Section 3_(1), proviso (a) has been brought in line with section 3(1) , sectlon '7 which uses the Word "exists". proviso (a). A provision has been added to deal with the case where section 3(1) , after the appointment of a Commission by a State Govern- proviso (bl- ment, the Central Government decides to appoint a Com- mission to inquire into the same subject." 'See the body of the Report, para. 21. 3See the body of the Report, para. 11. 3See the body of the Report, para. 24(3). 'iln any case, section 3(4) as proposed creates the obligation. 5For detailed reasons, see discussion in the body of the Report, para. 22. 27 Section 3(2) . Section 3(3) , Section 3(4) . General, Section 5(1) . Section 5(2) - Enforcement of Commis- sion's orders r uiring in on-nation. 28 As the word "exists" also has been framed in It has been made clear that the appointment of the Chairman will be by the appropriate Government. A new sub-section has been added to give the appro- priate Government power to ﬁll up vacancies or increase the number of members} is used in section 7 , the proviso harmony with that use. The provision regarding conclusion of inquiry Within the speciﬁed period--at present contained in section 3(l) -- main para. has been embodied here. Power has been given to the Government to extend the period in suitable cases." Some of the other important points relating to section 3 have been already discussed?' Section 4 An Explanation has been added to deal with the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Commission in relation to summoning a witness to attend in person. It broadly follows section 74 of the Copyright Act, 1957 and section 92 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951. Detailed reasons have been already given.' Section 5 As new sub-sections are proposed to be added in section 5 , consequential change has been made here. Under section 5(2) , a Commission has power to require any person to furnish information on matters useful for or relevant to the subject-matter of the inquiry. The sec- tion is, however, silent as to the penalty to be imposed on -any person who does not obey a requisition for information issued by the Commission thereunder. Nor does any other section of the Act impose a penalty for such dis- obedience. A question has been raised whether section 176 of the Indian Penal Code, under which a person "legally bound" to furnish information on any subject to any public servant and omitting to furnish such information, is punishable with imprisonment up to one month or ﬁne up to ﬁve hundred rupees or both, may apply to a requisition made under a special law. The decision of the Privy Council in Ali Mohamed v. Empe-rorﬁ may be seen on the point. In that case, a question arose whether a person failing to furnish information required by a Wakf Committee under 1See the body of the Report, para. 26 for reasons. 2See also the body of the Report, para. 25_ 3See the body of the Report, paras. 20 and 24(1)} (c). 'See the body of the Report. para. 27. 5A.I.R. 1945 P_ C. 147, 151. 29 section 3 , Mussalman Wakf Act, 1923, as amended in Bom- bay, could he proceeded against in the High Court for contempt under the Contempt of Courts Act, 1926 . The objection taken was, that under section 2(3) of the Con- tempt of Courts Act , the High Court could not take cogni- zance of contempt of a subordinate court, Where such contempt is an offence punishable under the Indian Penal Code . It was argued, that the failure to furnish the infor- mation in question was an offence under section 176 , Indian Penal Code. This argument was rejected by the Privy Council on the following chain of reasoning: (i) Section 176 applies only where a person is "legally bound" to furnish information; (ii) a person is legally bound to furnish only what is illegal for him to omit ( section 43 , latter half, Indian Penal Code ); (iii) it is illegal for a person to omit only that which is an offence ( section 43 , earlier half, Indian Penal Code ); (iv) an offence is only that which is punishable under the Indian Penal Code ( section 40 , Indian Penal Code}. (Therefore, section 1 '76 applies only to a failure which is an offence under some section of Indian Penal Code ). The Privy Council observed that if no other section of the Penal Code dealt with the matter, then, one must con- clude that the particular crime, though punishable under some other enactment, is not punishable under the Code, and would not fall under section 176. Therefore, the High Court was not prohibited from dealing with it under the Contempt of Courts Act . To make the matter clear a pro- vision on the subject has been added.' The difficulty felt by the Press Commission has already been dealt with? New sub-sections are being inserted to deal with matters bringing a Commission or its members into dis- repute. This has been discussed in detail?' Section 6A This is new and has been inserted to give protection regarding disclosure of a secret process of manufacture. Section 6D(1) of the (Australian) Royal Commission Act, 1902--1933, may be compared} 1See also the body of the Report, para. 28, 1'See the body of the Report, para. 1. 3See the body of the Report, paragraphs 12 and 30. 4See also the body of the Report, para. 32. 30 Section 8 (1) rule 4 of the Central Commissions of Inquiry (Procedure) Rules, 1960 issued on the 7th May, 1960 with one departure made from that rule. Where the conduct of any person is to be investigated merely in order to determine his credi- bility as a witness, the provision giving him right of hear- ing and producing evidence should not apply, To require opportunity for hearing in such cases would give rise to collateral inquiries which would never end. That has been made clear. Sections 8(2) and 8(3) 'These are new and have been added? to deal with certain rights which are important enough to deserve a place in the Act. They follow rule 5 of the Central Com- missions of Inquiry (Procedure) Rules, 1960 issued on the 7th May, 1960, with verbal changes. Section 8 (4) This represents existing section 8 . Portion referring to temporary absence or vacancy is being omitted, as an elaborate provision on the subject is being proposed?' Section 8 .4 A new provision has been added to deal with cases of vacancy or absence amongst the members of the Com- mission.' Sub--clause (1).--What is proposed is that absence or vacancy shall not invalidate the proceedings. Section 7(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 194? as originally inserted by the Industrial Disputes (Amendment and Temporary Provisions) Act, 1951 (40 of 1951) is more elaborate. Here a simpler provision is preferred. [That section was as follows :-- Section 5(4) , Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 has been mainly followed. 1See also para. 14 of the body of the Report. 2See also the body of the Report, paras. 14 and 33. 3See section 8A proposed to be inserted. 4See also the body of the Report, para. 34. 31 Sub-clause (2).--This is intended to deal with changes in constitution. It is considered that in such cases it should be permissible to continue the proceedings as they stand. Section 12 Power to make rules regarding assessors and expenses of witnesses has been added, as such a provision would be useful.' So far as rules made by the Central Government are concerned, recent legislative practice has been to require that the rule should be laid before each House of Parlia- ment and should be subject to modiﬁcation agreed to by both Houses (or to annulment, if so directed by both Houses). Consistently with this legislative practice, it is desirable that a similar provision should be inserted in the section under consideration also. Necessary amendment has been proposed." 1See the body of the Report, para. 35_ 2The draft follows the usual provision as to laying 01 rules, as found in recent Central Acts. The Law Commission is exa- mining separately the General Clauses Act , and in that connec- tion the question of inserting in that Act a general provision requiring laying' of rules before Parliament, is likely _to receive the attention of the Commission. The amendment suggested above is, therefore, subject to any recommendations that the Commission may make (while dealing with the General Clauses Act ) in relation to laying of rules before Parliament. S. No. INDEX TO APPENDIX 111 No. in the file' Name of appointing authority Pages ID. I}. I2. IIO I36 176 I 94 209 (Commissimu of I12 117 I28 13: 147 21 I 214 PART A (Commissions of Inquisj: set up by the Govemmanr of India)' ' Government of Ind.ia--Minjstry of Railways (Railway Board) . . Government of Indja---Ministry of In- formation and Broadcasting------Press Information Bureau . . . Government of India ----M inistry of Health . . . . Government of India----Ministry of Com- merce and Industry . . . Government of Inc1ia--Ministry of Com- merce and Indusu-y----Department of Company Law Administration . PART B Inquiry set up by the State Govarmnann) Govemment of Kerala Government of Gujarat Government of Rajasthan . Government of Niadhya Pradesh Government of Maharashtra Government of Andhra Pradesh Himachal Pradesh Admilﬁstration 1The Statement is based on iniormation supplied by various Ministries and State Governments. "The "S. No." mentioned indicates the Serial Numbers in the Law Com.m.iss'1on's File. 33 34 38 4! :53'; 45 47 49 49 50 57 5 7 APPENDIX III Statement PART A (Commissions set up by the Government of India) MINISTRY or RAILWAYS (Railway Board) Four Commissions of Inquiry were appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 for the purpose of making inquiries into the causes of the following Railway acci- dents :--- (1') to the Down Passenger train No. 565 at mile 66/15-16 between Jadcherla and Mahbulmagar stations on the Central Railway on the night of the lst/2nd September 1956; (ii) to train No. 603 Tutioorin Express at mile 170/14-12 between Ariyalur and Katlagam stations on the Villupuram-Trichinopoly (Chord) Line of the Southern Railway at 5-30 hours on the 23rd November 1956; (iii) to train No. 1 Down Bombay-Calcutta Mail at mile 97 /4 between Padli and Asvoli stations on the Igatpuri-Bhusaval double-line section of the Central Railway at 2245 hours of 23rd November 1957; and (to) between No. 2---DU/Down Passenger train and 45 Up Delhi-Pathankot Janta Express at 4-17 hours on 1st January 1958 at Mohri station on the Del.hi--Ambala Section of the Northern Railway. (Particulars are given below) 1 N Date of J Duration i Matter for which appointed ;' Remarks ointment Of app I Commission ll _ 5 20-12-1956 i For inquiry into the causes I 20,12 I95 to of the Mahbubnagar , 24-1-1957 Accident. _ - 5 9-12-1956 For inquiry into the causes 9 I2 I95 to of the Ariyalur Accident. i 29-12-1956 : of Commissions of Inquiry set up under the Act: 34 MINISTRY or Ramwmrs Date of Duration Matter for which appointment of appointed Remarks Commission i 4~r2-I957 4-12-1957 For inquiry into the to causes of the Iga- i 27-1-1958 turi Accident. 23-I-I958 23, 24, 25 For inquiry into the land causes of the I 27-1-I953 Mohri Accident. ! and from 3'2'1'953 to 17-2-1958 to 26-2-1958. MINISTRY or INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING Press Information Bureau -3-10-1952 1 Upto J The Press Cornmis-- As regards the -{The Press 31-7-I954 i sion was appointed action taken on Commission) J to enquire into the the Commission's state of the Press in India, its pre- sent and future lines of develop- ment and in parti- cular to exarnine:~ (1') the control, rnanagernent and ownership and ﬁna- ncial structure of newspapers, large and small, the perio- dical press and news agencies and feature syndicates ; (ii) the Working of monopolies and chains and their effect on the presen- tation of accurate news and fair views ; (iii) the eifect of holding companies, the distribution of advertisements and such other forms of external inﬂuence as Report, a State men: was, laid on the Table of L0]: Sabha on 30-5-1957 indi- cating action takcn on the main recommendations of the Press Com- mission. (As the statement is very lengthy, it is not reproduced here). Some of the recommendations were accepted. The Newspaper (Price and Page) Act, 1956, was enacted to reduce differences due to economic ad- vantages, etc. The Press and Regis- tration of Books 35 MINISTRY or Inronmarron AND BnoAncAsrINe----con-rd. Prn: Information Bureau----contd. Duration i Date of Matter for which appointment of J appointed Remarks Commission ,7 . I may have a bearing Act, 1867 was I on the development amended to i of healthy journa1-- provide for the ism ; appointment of (iv) the method of recruitment, training, scales of remunera- tion, beneﬁts and other conditions of employment of work- ing journalists, set- tlement of disputes affecting them and factors which inﬂuence the establishment and maintenance of high professional standards ; (v) the adequacy of newsprint supplies and their distribution among all classes of newspapers and the possibilities of pro- moting indigenous manufacture of (2') newsprint ; (ii) print- ing and composing machinery and (iii) ntachinery for (:1) ensuring high stand- ards of journalism and (b) liaison between Government and the Press ;the function- ing of Press Advisory Committees and organisations of edi-- tors and working journalists, etc. ; (of) freedom of the Press and repeal or amendment of laws I the Press Re- gistrar and other matters. Rates for telegraphs for news agency mes- sages were re- vised. Further with a View to extending the provisions of the Industrial Dis- putes Act to working journa- lists, the Working Journalists (Con-- ditions of Service and Misce1lane~ ous Provisions) Act, 1955, was enacted. Section 198B was introduced in the Criminal Proce- dure Code (re- lating to defama- tion of public servants). The Press [Objection- able Niatterj Act, 1951, was allowed to lapse. Cer- tain recommen- dations were brought to the notice of the State Governments, and the recommenda- tions relating to privileges and contempt of 36 Mnnsmv or INFORMATION AND BaoAncAs'r1Ns---concld. Press Information Bureau--concld. Matter for which appointed Remarks Date of Duration appointment of Commission 23-5-I958 Kerala , from the -and Madras date Food Poison- i which it ing Enquiry commences Commission) its ' quiry. not in oonsonance with it 5 and to make recommendations thereon. MINISTRY or HEALTH i0ne 'month The inquiry into and report on the follow- ing matters, and for that purpose could take such evidence as is considered neces- sary :--- (.:z) the circumstan- ces and the causes whereby the food or foodstuffs used in pre- paring the food ca.me to be contaminated ; (b) whether the contamination could have been avoided or detected in time ; (c) the action, if any, taken by the person or persons concerned after de- tection of such contamination to pre- vent further distri- bution of the conta- minated food or food- stuffs ; (:1) whether there had been any failure in taking adequate measures for the avoidance or timely Legislature were brought to the notice of the var- ious Legislatures. Certain recom- mendations were not accepted. I. The Kerala and Madras Food Poisoning Cases Enquiry Com- mission embarked upon the enquiry on the 6th June, 1958 and submit- ted its Report to the Government of India on the 5th July, 1958. 2. In the Report, the Commission have inter ah}: made-- (1') their special recommendation about 'the dis- posal of foodstuff: seized by the Kerala State Government 3 and (ii) their general recommendations in regard to the steps to be tak to prevent such occurrences in future. 3. In so faras the special recom- mendations are 37 : MINISTRY or HEALTH--cO'ntd_ Date of appointment :...._.__--_.._..._...._ __.+.___.. __.. Duration of Matter for which appointed detection of such contamination and the person or persons responsible for such' failure, and rences in future. (3) the measures, to be taken to safeguard against similar occur- Remarks concerned, they were accepted by the State Gov- ernment concern- ed who took necessary action in the matter. 4. As regards the ﬁfteen general recommendations, :1 Committee consisting of the representatives of the Ministries of C. & 1., Food and Agriculture, La- bour and Em~ ployment, Trans- port and Communications, Railways, S. R. & C. A., Law, Health, W. H. 8: S., Finance and Home Affairs was constituted. This Committee made recommen- dations for (1') short term meas- ures and (ii) long term meas- UICS. Short term _ures : Those insecticides which are consi- dered highly toxic to man were notified ag " Poison" uncle; the Poisons Act, 1919 by the Minis- try of Home Aff- airs. The State !!! eat- 38 Mnnsrav or HmL'1'H--com:ld. Date of 'Duration Matter _f or which appointment of_ _ appointed Remarks Commission Governments were also advised by that Ministry to take further action under the Poisons Act, 1919 . The other short term measures were taken by various Ministries con- cerned. Long term meas- ures : The Ministry of ' Food and Agri- culture were requested to take necessary action to sponsor and pilot a bill called "Indian Pesticides Bill" for regulat- ing the manu- facture, import, storage, transport, distribution, etc. of pesticides. Mnrtsrmr or Conmmncn AND IN'DUS'1'RY Date of Duration I Matter for Action taken appointment of which appointed on the Report Remarks Commission of the Commission of Inquiry I';r~4--t954 17th April, I. The Planta- Governmenfs (Plantation 1954 to tion Inquiry decision on Inquiry 15th Janu-- Commission the report of Commis-- ary, 1957. was appointed Plantation In- sion). for making a quiry Commis- comprehensive sion on Tea mqtury into was announced Mxnrannr or Commune: AND INDUSTRY---co1ttd. Date of Duration of Matter for Action taken Remarks appointment Commission which appointed on the Report of the Commission of Inquiry the economic in the form of conditions and a Resolution problems of published in the tea, the Gazette of coffee and India Extra- rubber indus-- ordinary dated tries. the ISt July, 1957. (It has 2. In particular; not been and without reproduced, be- prejudice to the ing lengthy). E generality of the I' foregoing po-- Some of wers, the Com-- the recom- mission was, in mendations the course of the of the inquiry to per-- Commission form the fol-- were accep- iowing func-- ted in tions, that is to principle, I say, to --- for example, ' (ct) ascertain making ﬁn- I separately the ance avail- amount of able to the capital, Indian tea industry, and non--India.n, invested respec- tively in tea, coffee and ruber plantations ; (I7) examine the methods of production and the costs of production of rubber in the different impor- tant growing areas in India ; (c) examine the present me- thods of ﬁnan- tea, coffee and[ avoiding ex- cessiv: use of Indus- trial Tribu- nals, regard for the ne- eds of wor- kers and availability of build- ing mater- ials, while phasing the implemen- tation of the Plantation Labour Act , undertaking of a study by the Tea 4-U Mmtsrnr or COMMERCE AND I1~mUs'rnY~--contd. Date of Duration Matter for Action taken appointment of _ which on the Report Commission appointed of the Remarks Commission of Inquiry cing tea, coffee Board of and rubber cost data, plantations ; organisa- tion of (d) examine small gro- the present me-- were into thods of marke-- co--opera- ting tea, coffee tives etc. and rubber in- Certain re- cluding all the commenda- factors which tions conte- affect the price mplating paid by the con- action by sumer; the State Govern- (e) examine merits and the possibilities the indus- of further ex- try were pension and" de- brought to velopment of the notice the tea, coffee of the State and rubber pla- Govern- ntation indus-- ments or tries. the indus- try. Certain 3. Onthe concIu- other re- sion of the en- commenda- quiry the Com- tions were mission was to not accep- make recom-- ted for rea- mendations to sons given Government on in detail in the measures the rao1u-- necessary : tion of the 1st July, (:2) to secure I957. for the producer a fair price for his product and to the consumer fair price for the article he buys; MINISTRY or Commncz AND I1~mUs'rmr--concId. 41 Date of nppointment Duration of Commission Matter for which appointed Action taken on the Report of the Commission of Inquiry Remarks (:5) to enable the provision of necessary ﬁna- nce for planta- tion industries ; (c) to ensure suitable znarlur ting arrange- ments ; and (d) to develop and expand the tea, coffee and rubber planta- tion industries. Department of Company Law Adminzistration 10-12-56 {g 2 years (but' see Remarks) To into the affairs of Dahnia Jain gronp of com- pa111BS. investigate.' ._j, ___..____n The term of Commis- sion was ex- tended from time to time so as to expire on. 3I--Io--I962. APPENDIX III Statement of Commz'ssi0ns of Inquiry set up under the Act PART B (Commissions set up by the State Govemments} KERALA Date of Duration Matter for S. No. appoint-- of which Remarks ment Commission appointed I. (Rice Deal May 1958 May 1958 The Govern- Inquiry to Feb. ment appoint-- Commis--- 1959. ed a Rice Deal sion.) In_quiry Cot_n-- 1'I1lSSl01'1 in May I953_ to enquire into and report on the following zﬂ (1') whether the purchase of 5,000 tons of rice by the Kerala Gov- ernment from Messrs. Sri- ramalu P. Suriyanarayana and Company, Nladras in Au- gust-September, 1957 was un- justiﬁed, hav- ing regard to the food situation in . the State?and (it) whether the purchase resulted in avoidable loss to the State?' 42 43 ICERALA----GO'ntd. 3._ (To in- quire into ﬁring). .4- . (T0 mquiremto death in police cus- tody). Date of appoint- ment 2-8-1958 22-11-1958 4-5-1961 at Ernakulam. (2') true facts relating to death; (ii) to devise means to prcr vent such incidents in future. Duration Matter for of which Remarks Commission appointed 32-8-1958 To inquire into The Commis- ' to police ﬁring at sion's ﬁnding 18-2-1959. Chandanathopu. was that the ﬁring was justiﬁed. (1) the cir-- . CUITISIHHCCS which led to the ﬁring. and (ii) whether the ﬁring was justified under the circums- tances? 22-11-1958 To inquire into The Com- to ﬁring at Mun-- missimfs ﬁnd- 6-8-1959. nat Regions. ing was that the ﬁring was ius-tiﬁed_ 4-5-1961 Suspected death to of Souri in 8-8-1961. Police lock up (1') Finding was ---- Suicide hanging. by (if) Recom- mendation was - Construction lock should be such a that should 3113' left person of "P in manner there not be loophole for a -14 KERALA---concId. Date of Duration Matter for which 3- N°- 3PP0i11t- of appointed mcnt Commission I 5. (To _in-- 13-9-1961 I3-9-I96I _To h inquire quire into to into t e causes bus acci- I5~r--1962. of the serious dent). bus accident that occurred at Chettupuzha near Ttichut and to suggest mea- sures to prevent such accidents. GUJARAT . I i . . . 1. (To 111- 5-8-1960 From I To mqutremto quire into 5-8-60 to and report on-- ﬁring). 15- 12-60 t'.e., the date of (1') the cir- Report z'.e., cumstances in 133 days. which the police | resorted to ﬁring on two occa- ' sions on the 12th July, 1960 i at Dohad (Dist. Pan- chmahals), and Commission (ii) whether ceased to the ﬁring and exist from their extent 13-7-1960 on each occa- sion justiﬁed not P WCTC 0!' Remarks however bent upon he might be to commit suicide to do that. The Commis- sion has submit- ted its Report and the same is under the con- sideration of Government. The mission consisted of Justice R. B. Metha held the morning ﬁring to be justiﬁed but the afternoon ﬁring as un- justiﬁed. Com- which 45 GUJARA-r--concId. 3 Date of Duration Matter for which S. No. appoint- of appointed Remarks ment Commission .2. (To in-- 30-8-I960 Commission To inquire into The Commis- quire into oeased to and report on sion could not a killing exist from whether the initially proceed incident). I-6-I961. authorities con-- with its work as cerned took a criminal case suﬂicient mea- in connection sures to avoid with the inci- or prevent the dent was pro- incidents in ceeding. The which two Sessions Judge Miyanas were made certain ob- kilied in the servations in court premises his judgment l at Halvad, which had a bear- on 15th July, ing on the terms i 1960 and of reference of : whether there the Commission. I' was any negli- In View of these ' gence on the observations it 1 part of the was not necessary ; ofﬁcials con-- for the Corn- ; cerned in tak-- mission to ' ing adequate proceed with . measures to its work and it Control andfor Was therefore to disperse the wound up. I crowd. 3. (To in-- 29-rt-1960 Report sub-- To inquire in-- The Commis- quire into mitted on to and report sion held the ﬁring). 8-3-6:. on and in res-- ﬁring to be justi- i pect of--- ﬁed and'Govern-- (i) the cir- ment accepted I 1 cumstances in the said ﬁnding. i I which the 1 Police resort- ' ed to ﬁring on I 2-Io-60 at f Shill (Distt. U Kaira), and . (ii) the ques- tion whether the ﬁring and its extent were justiﬁed or not ? Date of appointment 12th March, 1953 with Shri K. N. Wanchoo, Chief Justice, Rajas- than High Court, Jodhpur as the 46 RAJAs'rium I Duration of Commission 2nd March, 1959 to 11th October, 1959. ' (The Commission submitted its report on 11th October, ' Matter for which appointed To inquire into and report about the fund or valuables, cash, jewellery, like gold and silver, in the pre- sole member. (To 1959). mises of the temple inquire into Nath-- i of Shri Nathji at dwara Temple l Nathdwara. funds). f l i MADHYA PRADESH S. No. and Date of | Duration Matter for which name of the appoint-- of appointed Remarks Commission meiit Commission 1 3 months | To inquire into 18-1-1958 District Judge, Chhind- Wara, I The ﬁnding of' and 24 the police the Commission days. ﬁring on 26th was that the Augl1§t, 1957 police ﬁring 3' R31PU1'- was justiﬁed. 3 months To inquire into Do. and 16 the police ﬁring days. on 12th Janu- 9-TY 1958; at village Khobi (District Sur- guial I I 4? Mnonv.-x PnAot:sH--concld. S. No. and name of the Commission Dayai Shrivastva, Judge, Madhya Pradesh High Court, Gwalior Bench, Gwalior, as its sole member. I. Commis- sion of In- quiry con~ sisting of late Shri R. S. Bavdekar, Judge of the High Court, Bombay. I Duration Matter for which Date of appoint-- of appointed Remarks ment 1 Commission 3 l 6-34961 II months To inquire into and 22 the disturbances days. which took place in the districts of Jabalpur, Sagar, Damoh and Narsinmhapurin February, I962. I I MAHARASHTRA I 2o--8--t96o Three To inquire into The Commission months. the cases of the submitted the explosion which Report on occurred on the 5th November, 8th July, I960 I960. The in the Gas I-Io1-- Government ac- der No. 4, si- cepted the ﬁnd- tuated at La1-- ings and recom- baugh, Bom-- mendations of bay Gas Co. the Comn_1is-- Ltd., Bombay. sion of Inqutry. The Report was released for publication in -£8 MAHAnAsHrnA--contd. _ S. No. and name of the Commission Date of appoint- ment Duration of Matter for which Commission appointed Remark 5 2. Commis- sion of ﬁner? consisting of Shri T. S. Bil- STRIDI; Member, Industrial Court, Bombay. 19-5-1961 Five months To inquire into the causes of the explosion which occurred on the 17th March, 1961, in the Sohanlal Pahladrai Sol- vent Extraction Plant, Jalgaon. ' condition . the sheeting December, 1960. The Com- mission sug- gested. the measures to be taken to mini- misc corrosion and prevent such failure of Gas holders, and recommended more inspections of the internal of As this pro- be'- the holders. statutory _ vision is to made in Factories 1948, which is, a Central Act, the matter has been taken up» with the Gov- ernment of India, Ministry of La- bour and Emp- loyrnent, New Delhi. The Commis- sion submitted the .Report in October, 1961. The ﬁndings and the recommen- dations have been accepted by Government. The Reportis not so far released for as the question of taking 'action in pursuance the Report under deration. is cons- of Act, publication, . of" 49 MAHARASHTRA--COﬂtd. l . S. No. Eand Date of ' Duration of Matter for which name of the appoint- Commission appointed Remarks Commission ment - I 3. Commis- 3I-Io-I958 From The Maha The Commis- sion of 31-10-1958 Gujarat Pari-- sion of Inquiry Inquiryi: to shad erected a was appointed into the I6-5-1959 ' Martyrs Me-- by the former cases of morial ' un-- Government of Police' authorisedly in Bombay. As a ﬁring at Ahmedabad(now result of bifurca- Ahmeda-- forming part tion, Ahmedabad bad on of' the new forms part the 12th, Gujarat State) of the present. 13th and on the 8th Gujarat State. I4th August, 1958. August, After the re- I958, oon- inoval by the sisting of police of Shri Ius-- the unauthorised tice S. P. structures on Kotval, the morning of Judge, 12th August, High 1958, there Court, was an out- Bombay. ; break of mob- ' violence, in- cendiarism, loot- ing, etc. in certain ' parts of Ahme- dabad. In quelling these disturbances, the poiice opened ﬁre on the 12th, 13th and 14th August, . I958, which resulted in loss of life and injury to some persons. The former Bom- bay Govern- ment there- fore appointed Shri S. P. Klotvai, Judge, 56' MAnAmstrrna--contd. Date of J Duration of Matter for which 3DP0iI1t- I Commission appointed Remarks ment | High Court, Bombay, to be the Commis- sion of Inquiry with the follow- ing terms of reference, viz. -- (a) to as- certain the circumstances under which the police resorted to ﬁring on the said dates ; (b) to report . whether there was an attempt, direct or indi- rect, on the part of any person or political parties to create, or instigate others to create dis- order and to indulge in acts of vio- lence, incen- diarism, loot- ing and des- truction of private and I public pro- perty, in the event of the local authori- ties obstructing the erection of the Me- morials or removing them after erection ; 5| *MAHAnAsHTnA----eontd. ' 7 S. No. and' Date of i Duration of Matter for which name of the appoint-- » Commission , appointed Remarks Commission_ _ ment I r ! * __e__ ___m _,- ﬁ_.. /g__ m___ , , ﬂ _ _ _ ﬁ , _ . , . _ _ . , a _ % _ _ _ .H.___.._._.. J i It I ' (C) to de- ; termine whe- . ther the ﬁring on the said i date was I' justified or I (cf) to re- port on such ' other matters _ as may be' F 1 germane to i the above. I I 4. Commis- 24-7-1961 Three months The Panshet The inquiry sion of'. and Khadak-- could not be Inquiry wasla Dams completed be- consisting in Poona Dis- cause of death of late trict failed on of Shri R. 8. Shri 11.5. the 12th July, Bavdekar. Bavdekar, . I961, causing retired thereby serious Judge of damage to life I Court at in Poona and 5 Bombay. certain villages downstream of the Panshct Dam. A Com- . mission of -g Inquiry con- sisting of R. S. Bavdekar, retired! Judge of the High Court at Bombay, was appointed {to inquire in- to and report the High X' and property I I (a) the cau- M ses of the fail-- a J ure of the J S. No. and name of the Commission Date_ of appoint- ment 52 M.\HARAsHTnA----contd. Duration of Commission Matter for which appointed ' Remarks 3. (_Jomm1s---- men of In- quiry con- sisting of Shri VA. Naik, Judge of the High 'Court at Bombay. 3-11-1961 Upto the 30th April, 1962.. dams at Pan- shet and Khaclakwasla on 12th July, 1961, and the circum- stances in which such failure occur- red, and (b) the ade- quacy of the action taken by the various authorities be- fore, during and immedia- tely after the disaster to avert the same or to mitigate the conse- quences there- of'. The Commis- sion of Inquiry consisting of Shri R. S. Bavdekar, could not complete the inquiry about the failure of the Panshet and Khadakwasla Dams on account of the premature death of Bavdekar. Government therefore ap- pointed another Shri The Rcpon is yet to be mttted to ernment. sub- Gov- S. No. and Date of name of the appoint- Commission ment 53 MAHARAsH'mA---concld. Duration of Matter for which Commission appointed 1 Remarks Commission of ' Inquiry under the Commis- sions of In- quiry Act,_ I952 consisting of Shri Justice V. A. Naik, Iudge of the High Court at Bombay to in- quire into and report on--- (a) the fail- ure of the Panshet and Khadakwasia Dams and the circumstances in which such failure oc- curred; (b) the ade- quacy of action taken by the various au- thorities be- fore, during and imme- diately after the disaster to avert the same or to mitigate the conse- quences there- of. 54 ANDHRA Pnnmrsn 1, 1 Date of Duration of Matter for which appointment Commission appointed Remarks 16-40-1961. I 2 months Inquiry into the The Commission (To inquire into affairs of the could not sub- affairs of one Andhra Hand- mit its Report, as concern). _ loom Weavers stay orders were Limited, Vijaya- passed by the wada owing to High Court of its misrnanage- Andhra Pradesh. mcnt, etc. Hrmacmu. PRADESI-I ADMINISTRATION 20-1-1953 From Fire accident in (To inquire into 31-I-58 Shri Laxmi ﬁre). to Narain's Temple 7-3-58. l at Chamba. J GMGIPND--'I'SS-140 M of Law (6I64)--29--4-1963--I,75o 'iii