Ashokkumar Jain And Others vs State Of Maharashtra And Another on 28 August, 1986 ORDER 1. This Criminal Revision Application has been filed before this Court by the three applicants viz. applicant No. 1 Ashokkumar Jain, applicant No. 2 Dr. Ram Tarneja and applicant No. 3 T. P. Pithawala, under S. 401 read with S. 482 of the Cr. P.C., invoking the inherent powers of this Court to quash the order passed by the Chief Judicial magistrate, Yeotmal, dated 30th April, 1986, in Criminal Case No. 804/1986, directing the issue of summons to the five accused persons including the three applicants for the offences under Ss. 500, 501 and 502 of the I.P.C ., on a complaint lodged before the Magistrate on 30-4-1986 by the non-applicant-complaint Jawaharlal s/o Amolakchand Darda who was twice a Cabinet Minister and is at present a member of the Legislative Council in the State of Maharashtra. 2. The facts briefly stated are as follows : The Benett Coleman and Company Limited, Bombay, owns a chain of newspapers and periodicals having all India wide circulation in different languages viz. English, Hindi and Marathi, including the daily Hindi 'Navbharat Times'. The applicant No. 1 (Original accused No. 1) Ashokkumar Jain is the Chairman of the Board of Directors, having substantial share holding in the said Company. Applicant No. 2 Dr. Ram Tarneja (Original accused No. 2), is the General Manager of the said Company and the applicant No. 3 T.P. Pithawala (Original accused No. 5), is the printer and publisher of the daily 'Navbharat Times' published in Hindi language from Bombay, Delhi and Jaipur. 3-4. The news-item under the caption "Jawaharlal Darda per so crore banane ka arop" ("Jawaharlal Darda accused of amassing one hundred crores"), appeared in the city edition dated 2nd February 1986, and in Dak-Edition dated 3rd February 1986, of the 'Navbharat Times', which according to the complainant was per se defamatory of him and has affected his image socially and politically and has harmed his reputation. 5. A complaint was, therefore, lodged by the complainant before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Yeotmal, on 30-4-1986, containing the extracts of the alleged defamatory imputations from the aforesaid news-item, contending inter alia that the applicants and two others viz. (1) Shri Rajendra Mathur, Editor, Navbharat Times, and (2) Shri Surendra Pratap Singh, Local Editor, Navbharat Times, have committed the offences under Ss. v of the I.P.C . by owning, editing, printing and publishing, prima facie false and defamatory imputations against the complainant to the knowledge of the accused, without taking any reasonable care and caution. According to the complainant the accused persons bear ill-will, malice and motivation against the complainant and they were out to defame him by all possible means. 6. Some imputations published in the aforesaid news-item and reproduced in the complaint are as following Complaint Para. 7. "Khuch sansad sadyaso ne Pradhanmantri ko dnapan dekar Maharashtra ke urja, darubandi or sanscrutik Karyamantri Jawaharlal Darda ke verudh 51 gambhir arope lagaye hai" (Nagar Pratinidhi) ("Some members of the Parliament have given a representation to the Prime-Minister making 51, serious charges against Jawaharlal Darda, Minister for Energy, Prohibition and Cultural Affairs in the Maharashtra State") (City Representative). Complaint No. 9. "Unka yh dava hai ke apne punji ke seva des pendrah karod rupeya or jayada karch kar ke kesi den rajya ke mukhyamantri ban sakte hai" (Their contention is that besides his wealth, by spending extra Rs. ten to fifteen crores he can on any day become Chief Minister)" Complaint para. 10 : "Shri Darda, R. K. Dhavan se sambandh rakhanevale ake mahila ko dase hajar rupeye mahena deya karte thy" "(Shri Darda used to pay Rs. 10,000/- p.m. to a woman who has relations with Shri R. K. Dhawan)". Complaint Para. 11 : "Yahi nahi, Shri darda to Arun Nahru or Arunsinh se sampark banye rakhane ke leye 10 se 20 hajar rupeya mahina kharch keya karte hai" "(Not only this, Shri Darda, spends Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 20,000/- to keep contacts with Arun Nehru and Arun Singh)" Complaint Para. 12 : "Bina name ke ese dnapan se Churchgate ke nikat She Darda ke flate ko lakar sansane koje dava keya gaya hai. Kuvikhyat taskar daniyal walcot ne yah flate herasat se bhagne ne madade ke leya deya tha" "(Shri Darda gave his own flat near Churchgate to the notorious smuggler Danial Walcot to help his escape from the custody)". Complaint Para. 13 : "Ke Pradhanmantri ke nerdeshper Kendreya janch Bureau ne Shri Darda ke yaha pade chupe or galat kamo ke vistrute report bhejwaya de hai" "At the direction of Prime-Minister, The Central Bureau of Investigation has sent a detailed report about the raids conducted at the place of Shri Darda and about his mis-deeds)." Complaint Para. 14 : "Maharashtra me Congress ke hak se bahumat ko dekhate huya Shri Darda ne Rajiv Gandhi ko dhamke de hai ke use warrent nekalkar unko hirasat me lane ka phayasala keya gaya to apene akhbaro ke madat se ve rajya ke rajnitik sethi or asthir banadenge" "(In view of the slender majority of the Congress in the Maharashtra State, Shri Darda has given a threat to Rajiv Gandhi that he would further destabilise the political situation with the help of his newspapers if a decision is taken to put him behind the bars by issuing a warrant." Shri Darda ke najar me Rajiv Gandhi eke nyasekha hai" Jese paylate ke rupe me nerdesh laneke adat padi hai" "(In the eyes of Shri Darda, Rajiv Gandhi is a novice who is accustomed to take orders as a pilot.)" "Mamuli logno ke vidhan sabha or sansad sadasya chune jane ke bad arth shakti or demag ka estamal kar kuch bhe sambhave kar dekhaya ja sakta hai" (With the ordinary people being elected as members of the State Legislature and Parliament anything can be made possible by use of brain and moneypower) The complainant Shri Darda in his complaint contended that the aforesaid news-item which has been printed, published and edited is false and per se defamatory and has defamed him seriously in the eyes of the public, has affected his political career, and has lowered him down in the eyes of the public. The complainant further avers in the complaint that the accused have thus committed offences under S. 500 , in addition, accused No. 5 has committed the offence under S. 501 and the accused Nos. 1 and 2 have committed the offence under S. 502 of the I.P.C. 7. Along with the complaint the complainant has filed list of witnesses and documents as per the list viz. (1) 'Navbharat Times', Hindi issue dated 3-2-1986 and 2-2-1986 (original copy), (2) Copy of notice dated 5-2-1986 sent by the complainant through his Advocate from Bombay (3) Xerox copies of the statement of assessments and liabilities of the complainant individual and in M.V.F. capacity dated 31-3-1985 and Wealth Tax Assessment Order of 30-6-1983, dated 29-4-1985. 8. The learned Magistrate received the complaint, recorded the statement on oath of the complainant Shri Darda, perused the documents and passed the impugned order as follows : "Order (Passed on 30-4-1986) 1. Read the complaint and statement on oath of the complainant. Also read the news-item published on front page in the issue of 2/3 February 1986 of the Navbharat Times, published from Bombay, Delhi and Jaipur." 2. Read the document filed along with complaint. 2A. Heard Advocate Bombaywala for complainant 3. Prima facie case of defamation which does not appear to fall within any of the exceptions to section 499 of the Indian Penal Code has been made out. 4. Hence register as a summary criminal case under sections 500, 501 and 502, I.P.C. 5. Issue summons to accused persons returnable on 20-5-1986. P.F. in three days" 9. It is against this order that the present revision application under S. 401 read with S. 482 , Cr.P.C. has been filed by the three applicants. 10. I have heard Shri C. G. Madkholkar for the applicants and Shri S. V. Manohar for the complainant-non-applicant No. 2 Shri Darda and Shri V. V. Naik Asstt. Government Pleader for the State, at length. 11. It was contended by the learned counsel for the applicant Shri Madkholkar that merely because the applicant No. 1 Shri Ashokkumar Jain happens to be the Chairman of the Board of Directors of Benett Coleman and Company and has some shareholdings in the said Company and merely because the accused No. 2 happens to be the General Manager and applicant No. 3 happens to be the Business Director, they cannot be made ipso facto liable for the news-item which has appeared in the Navbharat Times unless some overt act is alleged on their part showing that they had some concern in editing, preparing, displaying or collecting the material for the said news-item or had a previous knowledge that such news-item was going to be published in the Navbharat Times issue dated 2nd and 3rd February 1986. According to learned counsel for the applicants, the three applicants were least concerned with the editorial work in respect of the said daily and the publication of the said news-item, and that, they have been made parties to the complaint merely to harass them and to get wide publicity. The complaint according to Shri Madkholkar against the applicants is a gross abuse of the process of law. 12. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the non-applicant contended that the news-item was prima facie per se defamatory, that it has to be presumed that the editor, printer and publisher of the Navbharat Times, were aware of the comments of the news-item before publication and were, therefore, prima facie liable for defaming. It was, further, urged that the applicants Nos. 1 and 2 are also prima facie liable since it has been alleged in the complaint that they too had previous knowledge of the defamatory news-ifem and as they were bent upon defaming the complainant non-applicant. It was also contended that once a prima facie case is made out against the applicants the High Court should be loath to interfere with the discretion exercised by the Magistrate judicially and it is not necessary at this stage to enter into a detailed discussion on merits of the case to find out whether or not the applicants Nos. 1 and 2 really had the previous knowledge or had no concern with the publication of the news-item. 13. The law on the subject is now well settled. I will first deal with the case of applicant No. 3 T. P. Pithawala who has admittedly been described in the petition itself as Printer and Publisher of the Navbharat Times, where the alleged defamatory news-item was published. A presumption under S. 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, can be drawn against applicant No. 3 T. P. Pithawala, that being a Printer and Publisher he had previous knowledge of the defamatory imputations in question against the non-applicant-complainant. 14. Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), runs as follows : "In any legal proceeding whatever, as well civil as criminal, the production of a copy of such declaration as is aforesaid, attested by the seal of some Court empowered by this Act to have custody of such declarations (or in the case of the editor, a copy of the newspaper containing his name printed on it as that of the editor) shall be held (unless the contrary be proved), to be sufficient evidence as against the persons whose name shall be subscribed to such declaration, (or printed on such newspaper, as the case may be) that the said person was Printer, or Publisher or printer and publisher (according as the words of the said declaration may be), of every portion of every (newspaper) whereof the title shall correspond with the title of the (newspaper) mentioned in the declaration, (or the editor of every portion of that issue of newspaper of which a copy is produced.)" 15. In the State of Maharashtra v. Dr. R. B. Chowdhari , in a prosecution under S. 500 of the I.P.C. against members of the Editorial Board including one Madane who has made a declaration in Form 1 as Printer, Publisher and Editor, it was held that the presumption under S. 7 operated only against Madane who had also admitted that he was the Editor and as the person who was responsible for selection of the material and whose name was printed on the weekly 'Maharashtra' not only as printer and publisher but also as Editor. It was further held that the said presumption under S. 7 cannot be drawn against the other members of the Editorial Board who had not declared themselves as Editors of the Newspapers. 16. The ratio is that one who declares himself to be the Editor, Printer and Publisher of the newspaper, as prescribed under the Act and whose name is printed as such in the newspaper is liable for every portion of that newspaper not to speak of defamatory article or news-item in that issue of the newspaper. Such a person can no doubt defend himself in the trial that the said defamatory publication was for public good under the first exception to S. 499 , I.P.C. or that the imputations on the character of another was made in good faith and for public good under 9th Exception to S. 499 of the I.P.C. but, he cannot question the issue of process in the initial stage of the proceedings at which stage, he not being an accused does not come into picture at all. 17. S. Nihal Singh v. Arjan Das , 1983 Cri LJ 777 decided by the Delhi High Court can fruitfully be referred to in this connection. The observations appearing in paragraph 11 in that case are pertinent to note here : "In the instant case the declaration printed at the bottom of the back page of the newspaper shows that the newspaper had been printed and published for the Proprietors Indian Express Newspapers (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd; by S. K. Kohli, petitioner No. 5 and S. Nihal Singh and Prabhash Joshi who are Editor-in-Chief and resident Editor respectively of the newspaper. Ex facie a resident Editor will be an associate of the Editor-in-chief in the selection of news-items and to that extent he is answerable on a charge of defamation, Hence in view of foregoing provisions of law a presumption will arise against all three of them that they are printer, publisher, Editor-in-Chief and resident Editor respectively of the newspaper and as such they are aware of the contents of offending news-items. However, it is difficult to draw such presumption in the case of other petitioners viz. Arun Shorie, petitioner No. 2 and A. M. Dhar petitioner No. 4. Their names do not find place in the declaration printed on the newspaper itself and there is no iota of evidence to show that they are in any manner concerned with the collection, control, or selection of the matter printed in the newspaper. Their designations as Executive Editor/Editor of the Express News Service will not per se warrant an inference that they are in any way responsible for the selection of the material. An authority for this view may be found in State of Maharashtra v. R. B. Chowdhary , ." The aforesaid 1968 Supreme Court authority has been already referred to above by me. 18. In result, in so far as applicant No. 3 T. P. Pithawala the Printer and Publisher of the Navbharat Times is concerned, no interference in the order of the Magistrate issuing process against him under Ss. 500, 501 and 502 is called for as there is sufficient prima facie case made out in the complaint, in the statement on oath of the complainant and in the notice given by the complainant and which case has been supported by the presumption under S. 7 of the Act for his liability for the alleged defamatory imputations published in the daily 'Navbharat Times' on 2nd and 3rd February, 1986. The revision of the applicant No. 3 Shri T. P. Pithawala, Printer and Publisher of the Navbharat Times against the impugned order, therefore, fails. 19. The case of the applicant No. 1 Ashokkumar Jain the Chairman of the Board of Directors of Benett Coleman Company Limited, which owns the newspaper 'Navbharat Times' as well as that of applicant No. 2 Dr. Ram Tarneja the General Manager, Benett Coleman Company Limited, Bombay, is however, on a different footing. Both of them not being declared in the newspaper as either Editor, Printer or Publisher of the Newspaper Navbharat Times, the presumption under S. 7 of the Act is not available against them to hold that they had prior knowledge of the publication of the defamatory imputations. The liability for publication of the offending news-item can be fastened on them only if the complaint and the documents accompanying the complaint and the statement of the complainant show that they had such prior knowledge or that they were somehow concerned with the publication of the defamatory news-item and that they had the requisite intention to harm the reputation of the complainant, the non-applicant, by publication of the concerned news-item. There is considerable force in the contention of the learned counsel Shri Madkholkar that they cannot be made ipso facto liable for the defamatory news-item in question unless it is shown that they were concerned with the publication of the same. This is precisely because the object of the enquiry under S. 202 , Cr.P.C. for issuing process under S. 204 , Cr.P.C. is to ensure that a person may not be needlessly harassed by compelling him to answer a criminal charge without the Court being satisfied above a prima facie case being established against him for issuing process. The Magistrate while issuing a process under S. 204 , Cr.P.C. has to satisfy himself that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against an accused person. 20. It is, therefore, necessary to find out whether a prima facie case is made out, against applicants Nos. 1 and 2 in the complaint, in the statement on oath recorded by the Magistrate and in the notice sent by the complainant. 21. The impugned order of issuing summons to the applicants-accused and other was passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Yeotmal, on 30-4-1986 under Ss. 500, 501 and 502 of the I.P.C . At that time, only three documents namely the complaint, statement of complainant on oath and notice of 5-2-1986 were relevant for consideration by the learned Magistrate. On 13-6-1986 again the complainant through his Advocate served a notice on the accused stating that he desires to adduce evidence of the original reply dated 5th March, 1986, given by the Advocate on behalf of the accused-applicant and two others. The learned counsel for the complainant relied upon this reply notice dated 5th March, 1986, given by the accused applicants in support of the impugned order. In paragraph 5 of the said reply the applicants-accused alleged as follows : "The news-item published on 2nd February, 1986, was based upon an unsigned memorandum a copy of which came in possession of our client's newspaper 'Navbharat Times' and which our clients learnt was submitted by certain M. P's and M.L.A's to the Prime Minister of India Mr. Rajiv Gandhi. In the said news-item of 2nd February, 1986, our clients have merely referred to the source and some of the items mentioned in the said memorandum submitted to the Prime Minister without any comments. The said news item was published by our clients in public interest and the same was published bona fide." 22. Shri Manohar for the complainant contended that by this reply notice, the applicants Nos. 1 and 2 have admitted their prior knowledge of the defamatory imputations and were, therefore, liable to answer the charge of the defamation. Whether or not, it was contended, the said publication was in public interest and was published bona fide is a matter which has to be considered at the stage of trial and not at this stage. I am afraid, the said reply notice dated 5th March, 1986, which came on record on 13-6-1986, after the impugned order was passed on 30-4-1986 cannot be taken into consideration at all to find out whether the Magistrate has exercised the discretion judicially and properly for the simple reason that while exercising the said discretion in issuing process under S. 204 , Cr.P.C. the said document i.e. reply notice dated 5-3-86 was not before the learned Magistrate at all. Both the reply notice dated 5-3-1986, and the affidavit of Pithawala, explaining the same have therefore to be left out of consideration, at this stage. 23. We have, therefore, to restrict ourselves to only three documents i.e. the complaint, statement of the complainant on oath recorded by the Magistrate on 30-4-1986 and the notice dated 5-2-1986 given by the complainant to the applicant-accused through his Advocate, besides the issues of Navbharat Times, dated 2-2-1986 and 3-2-1986. Some recitals in the complaint are relevant in this context, to find out a prima facie case against the applicants Nos. 1 and 2 respectively. 24. In paragraph 7 of the complaint, after referring to the alleged defamatory imputations in the said news item, the complainant has averred as follows : "It is quite clear from the said material omissions that the accused persons bear ill-will malice, motivation against the complainant and they are out to defame him, by all possible means. The complainant submits that the accused persons have not taken any reasonable care and caution and have not acted in good faith in public interest before publishing, editing, printing the said news ...... which contains prima facie false, defamatory imputations against the complainant to the knowledge of the accused persons." The essential ingredients of the offences under Ss. 500, 501 and 502, I.P.C . viz. the intention to defame and prior knowledge on the part of the accused persons have been clearly spelled out in the complaint. In paragraph 8 of the complaint the complainant further recites : "Accused persons recklessly and maliciously and intentionally printed, edited and published the said news without verification of its truth. They have also failed to take reasonable care and caution before printing the said news-item." 25. The contention of the learned counsel for the applicant Shri Madkholkar, that the reference to the prior knowledge and intention has been made in an omnibus manner against all the five accused and that specific overt acts were, therefore, necessary to be alleged against each of them cannot be accepted, for it is at the stage of trial that the complainant has to prove that each of the accused Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 had prior knowledge and were actuated by malice and had necessary intention to defame the complainant. At the stage of issuing process, it was sufficient for the complainant to allege prior knowledge on the part of the accused persons, to make out a prima facie case, which the complainant has done in this case. 26. In paragraph 18 of the complaint, it has been specifically alleged that the accused have committed offences under S. 500 of the I.P.C., that in addition accused No. 5 applicant No. 3 T. P. Pithawala has committed offence under S. 501 and that accused Nos. 1 and 2 (applicants Nos. 1 and 2), have committed offence under S. 502 , I.P.C. Section 502 of the I.P.C. makes it clear that sale of printed or engraved substance containing defamatory matter knowing that it contains such matters is punishable. In the present case, there was a prior knowledge on the part of the accused Nos. 1 and 2 viz. Ashokkumar Jain and Dr. Ram Tarneja as alleged by the complainant, of the defamatory imputations contained in the news-item in question, the publication of which, they could have prevented. The applicants Nos. 1 and 2 cannot, therefore, escape their liability unless they make out the case of Exception either under 1 or under 9 to S. 499 of the I.P.C. of good faith and public interest, which is a matter which can only be considered at the stage of trial and not at the stage of issuing process. 27. In the statement recorded by the learned Magistrate the complainant has stated as follows : "Accused persons are owners, printers and publishers of the said news-item. Accused Nos. 1 to 5 have committed an offence of defamation against me. Accused Nos. 1 and 2 i.e. Ashokkumar Jain and Dr. Ram Tarneja have committed an offence under section 502 , Indian Penal Code. Accused No. 5 Mr. Pithawala who is printer and publisher of Navbharat Times has committed an offence under section 501 of the Indian Penal Code." 28. In paragraph 17 of the statement the complainant stated before the Magistrate as follows : "Accused persons have not made any enquiries from me before publishing per se defamatory news-items against me." 29. In the notice dated 5th February 1986, to the applicants Nos. 1 and 2 and two others viz. Rajendra Mathur, Editor, Navbharat Times and Surendra Pratap Singh, Local editor, Navbharat Times (original accused Nos. 3 and 4), following recitals have been made : "It is shocking that you have taken liberty to publish such serious and false allegation merely on the basis of an alleged unsigned statement alleged to have been made by some unknown unidentifiable persons as stated in the news-item itself, without bothering to find out the truth or without making any discreet and prudent inquiries." It is on the basis of this material contained in the complaint, the statement on oath of the complainant and the notice given by the complainant that it has to be seen whether the discretion exercised by the learned Magistrate was proper and judicious or whether it calls for any interference by this Court under its inherent powers under S. 482 , Cr.P.C. on the ground that it is arbitrary and constitutes an abuse of process of law. 30. It is settled law that inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 482 , Cr.P.C. to quash the criminal proceedings has to be exercised sparingly and only when a case is made out or only in a proper case to prevent an abuse of process of the Court or to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily, the criminal proceeding instituted against accused person has to proceed with in accordance with law. It is only when the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint on their face value do not constitute offence that an interference by the High Court is necessary. At the stage of issuing process a Magistrate is restricted to find out whether there is prima facie case or not. It is not for the High Court to enter into a detailed discussion regarding the factual aspects or to launch meticulous enquiry as to the merits of the order of the Magistrate. It is at the stage of the trial that the guilt or otherwise of the accused has to be considered and while issuing process while taking cognizance of the case, only a prima facie case needs to be looked into. 31. In State of West Bengal v. Swapan Kumar Guha , , the Supreme Court has held that, when after application of mind on the basis of a petition of complaint made and the statement of the complainant recorded by the Magistrate, cognizance has been taken and such an order is sought to be quashed it would not be legal and reasonable for the High Court at this stage to launch a detailed and meticulous examination of the case on merits and to find out as to whether there is sufficient material to hold the accused persons guilty of the accusations levelled against them, as this is a matter which is to be decided at the trial and not at the stage of taking cognizance. 32. In Municipal Corpn. of Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi , , the following observations have been made : It is, therefore, manifestly clear that proceedings against an accused in the initial stages can be quashed only if on the face of the complaint or the papers accompanying the same, no offence is constituted. In other words the test is that taking the allegations and the complaint as they are, without adding or subtracting anything, if no offence is made out then the High Court will be justified in quashing the proceedings in exercise of its powers under section 482 , Cr.P.C." In a recent case J. P. Sharma v. Vinod Kumar Jain , the Supreme Court has referred to the High Court's jurisdiction under S. 482 , Cr.P.C. to quash the criminal complaint and the proceedings. It has been observed by the Supreme Court, while allowing the appeal quashing the issue of process under S. 482, as follows : "The question at this stage is not whether there was any truth in the allegations made but the question is whether on the basis of the allegations a cognizable offence or offences had been alleged to have been committed. The facts subsequently found out to prove the truth or otherwise on the allegation is not a ground on the basis of which the complaint can be quashed ........ We are not concerned with the truth or otherwise of the allegations made in the complaint that would be investigated at the time of trial. In that view of the matter we are unable to sustain the order under appeal. We make it quite clear that we are not expressing any opinion on the merit of the charge and the complaint would be investigated in accordance with law and the accused persons would be entitled to prove before the court that no charge has been made out against them and they should be acquitted of the charges. But, at this stage under inherent power of Section 482 , Cr.P.C. in our opinion, in the background and circumstances of this case the Court should not have used the extraordinary power." 33. Having regards, therefore, to the dictum of the Supreme Court decision reported in Municipal Corpn. of Delhi v. Ram Kishan Rohtagi , and in State of West Bengal v. Swapan Kumar Guha , (cited supra.), and further having regard to the fact that the documents before the learned Magistrate disclose a prima facie case under Ss. 500, 501 and 502 against all the applicants for intentionally defaming the non-applicant-complainant with prior knowledge of defamatory imputations and publications, there is no case at this stage to exercise either revisional powers under S. 401 and inherent powers under S. 482 Cr.P.C. for quashing the impugned order. In result the discretion exercised by the learned Magistrate while passing the impugned order being proper and correct the revision application of all the three applicants under S. 401 read with S. 482 , Cr.P.C. fails and is hereby dismissed. 34. Applications dismissed.