Dhanveer Singh vs B.S. Gautam on 21 May, 2022 IN THE COURT OF SH. RAMESH KUMAR, PRINCIPAL DISTRICT & SESSIONS JUDGE, NORTH-EAST, KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI Criminal Revision No.49/2021 CNR No. DLNE01-003657-2021 Dhanveer Singh S/o Sh. Raghuveer Singh R/o Flat No. 309, Block O, Vivek Vihar, Sector 82, Gautam Budh Nagar, U.P. .....REVISIONIST VERSUS B.S. Gautam S/o Late Sh. Kehri Singh R/o C-6/428, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi-110053. .....RESPONDENT Date of institution of case : 28.10.2021 Date of reserving the case for order : 20.05.2022 Date of passing of order : 21.05.2022 CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION, UNDER SECTION 397/399 OF THE CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE , 1973, AGAINST THE IMPUGNED ORDER, DATED 15.10.2019, PASSED BY THE COURT OF SH. RAKESH KUMAR RAMPURI, LD. MM-04, NORTH-EAST DISTRICT, KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI, IN CRIMINAL CASE NO. 172/2017, TITLED AS "B.S. GAUTAM VS. RAMBIR SINGH NAGAR & ORS., PS BHAJANPURA U/S 500/506 IPC , WHEREBY, THE LD. MAGISTRATE HAS TAKEN COGNIZANCE AGAINST ACCUSED PERSONS AND ISSUED SUMMONS. Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 1/9 JUDGMENT: 1. The present revision petition, is preferred, by Dhanveer Singh, (hereinafter referred to as 'revisionist'), against the impugned order, dated 15.10.2019, passed by the court of Sh. Rakesh Kumar Rampuri, ld. MM-04, North-East District, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi, whereby, the ld. Trial Court took cognizance of offences punishable u/s 500 / 506 IPC, against accused persons and, directed issuance of summons against them, including the present revisionist, namely, Dhanveer Singh. 2. Brief facts, leading to filing of the present revision petition, are that, the respondent/complainant, filed an application under Section 200 Cr.P.C., read with Section 156(3) Cr.P.C., against revisionist i.e Dhanveer Singh and, other accused persons, namely, Rambir Singh Nagar, Radhey Shyam Bharti, Hari Shankar, Mamraj Singh, Ajit Singh, Heera Lal, Rajender Singh, K.P. Garg and Jagdish Kumar, on the ground that aforesaid accused persons, including the revisionist, made defamatory statements against the police, wherein they stated that the respondent/complainant B.S. Gautam, is in the habit of picking up quarrels with the locality people and, also, used to make false and baseless complaint against them for harassing them. It is, further, stated that the accused persons, had also stated that, Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 2/9 respondent/complainant B.S. Gautam, was patient of mental disease. 3. The ld. Trial Court, vide order dated 24.01.2018, dismissed the application, filed by the respondent/complainant, under section 156 (3) Cr.P.C., with the observations that, complainant sought to register an FIR under Section 193 / 341 / 504 / 506 / 34 IPC, against the aforesaid accused persons, including the revisionist, however, from the averments of the respondent/complainant, only, section 506 IPC, is made out, which is non-cognizable offence, and, as such, the ld. Trial Court, listed the matter for pre-summoning evidence. 4. In the pre-summoning evidence, CW-1 B.S. Gautam, CW-2 Suraj Pal Singh, CW-3 Sh. Rakshit Kumar and CW-4 Sh. Gyan Kumar, were examined and matter was adjourned on the point of summoning. Thereafter, vide impugned order dated 15.10.2019, Ld. Trial Court ordered that prima facie, there is sufficient material on record, to proceed against the above named accused persons, including the revisionist, for committing offences punishable under section 500 / 506 IPC. Accordingly, aforesaid accused persons, including the revisionist, were ordered to be summoned. Being aggrieved with the aforesaid impugned order, the present revision petition is preferred by the revisionist,namely, Dhanveer Singh, who is one of the accused before the ld. Trial Court. 5. I have heard ld. counsel for the revisionist and ld. counsel Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 3/9 for the respondent, and, have carefully gone through the entire record. 6. It is argued by ld. counsel for the revisionist that ld. Trial Court, passed the impugned order, without appreciating the material and evidence on record, hence the order of summoning against the revisionist, is bad in law and, is liable, to be set aside. It is further argued that, the ld. Trial Court, overlooked the statement of the revisionist, recorded by IO, in complaint case no. 971 of 2013, titled as "B.S. Gautam vs. Rambir Singh Nagar & Ors." which was withdrawn by the respondent/complainant, on 01.06.2016. It is further argued that, as per Vth Exception of Section 499 IPC, nothing shall amount to defamation of a person, if the same is made to express in good faith any opinion, whatever, respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a court of justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears in that conduct and no further. He has argued that the impugned order, dated 15.10.2019, was passed in mechanical manner and, is liable to be set-aside. 7. The impugned order, dated 15.10.2019, is reproduced as under: "Present: Complainant with counsel. Ld. Counsel for the complainant made detailed oral Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 4/9 submissions on point of summoning, complainant B.S. Gautam (CW-1) testified that the accused persons namely Rambir Singh Nagar, Radhey Singh Bharti, Hari Shankar, Dhanvir Singh, Mamraj Singh, Ajit Singh, Heera Lal, Rajender Singh, K.P. Garg and Jagdish Kumar made defamatory statements to the police wherein they had stated that the complainant has been in the habit of picking up quarrels with the locality people and also in the habit of giving false and baseless complaint against them for harassing them. Complainant B.S. Chauhan further stated that the said accused persons had also stated that he was patient of mental disease. Complainant submits that he never had any mental disease or any treatment for the same. Complainant B.S. Chauhan (CW 1) also deposed that the aforesaid statement of the accused persons had brought great disrepute, humiliation and insult to him. Complainant further claimed that he had not made any other complaint except aforesaid cited accused person before police and the same is also supported from RTI reply of police Mark X and therefore, Complainant submits that accused person had intentionally and deliberately given false statement against him just to cause more assessment to him. Complainant B.S. Chauhan (CW 1) further deposed that when he contacted the accused persons they started misbehaving with him and also use abusive language. Complainant B.S. Chauhan (CW 1) further deposed that the said accused persons had threatened him to face dire consequences if he did not leave the area and they had also threatened him to kill if he did not sell out his own house to accused no. 1 i.e. Rambir Singh Nagar. On the other hand CW-2 Sh. Suraj Singh, CW-3, Rakshit Kumar and CW-4 Gyan Kumar had testified that the complainant B.S. Chauhan (CW 1) is person of good behaviour and was Chief Finance Manager in State Trading Corporation PSU under Ministry of Commerce, Govt. of India. They further testified that complainant has never Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 5/9 involved in any offence, case or wrong doing. Now, Ld. Counsel for complainant submits that the aforesaid acts of the accused persons had harmed the reputation of the complainant in the eye of locality people and they have also threatened him to face dire consequences towards the complainant. After hearing the statement of Ld. Counsel for the complainant and considering the testimony of the complainant and his witnesses as well as statement of accused persons which is Mark X, this Court is of considered view that there is prima facie sufficient material to proceed against aforesaid cited accused persons for committing offence punishable under Section 500 / 506 IPC. The court is also guided of certain legal preposition as to at the time of summoning of accused, court has to see the case the / version / testimony of complainant on its face value which may be tested during cross-examination in course of further proceedings. Accordingly, above cited accused persons i.e. Rambir Singh Nagar, Radhey Singh Bharti, Hari Shankar, Dhanvir Singh, Mamraj Singh, Ajit Singh, Heera Lal, Rajender Singh, K.P. Garg and Jagdish Kumar be summoned for aforesaid offences for NDOH on PF. Now matter be again listed on 13.02.2020." 8. Section 500 of The Indian Penal Code , 1860, is reproduced, herein, below for ready reference : 500. Punishment for defamation.-- "Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both." Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 6/9 9. Section 506 of The Indian Penal Code ,1860, is, also, reproduced, herein, below for ready reference. 506. Punishment for criminal intimidation: "Whoever commits, the offence of criminal intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, etc.--And if the threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or to impute, unchastity to a woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or with both." 10. In the present matter, aforesaid accused persons, including the revisionist herein, made defamatory statements to the police, wherein, they had stated that the respondent/complainant, B.S. Gautam, had been in the habit of picking up quarrels with the locality people and, also, in the habit of giving false and baseless complaints against them for harassing them. However, RTI dated 12.09.2014, 'Mark Y', states that there is no other complaint given by the respondent/complainant. 11. In the present matter, ld. Trial Court has observed, after Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 7/9 hearing the arguments of ld. counsel for the respondent/complainant and, considering the testimony of the respondent/complainant and, other witnesses, examined in complainant's evidence, as well as statement of aforesaid accused persons, including the revisionist, Mark X, that, prima facie, there was sufficient material on record, to proceed against abovementioned accused persons, including the revisionist i.e Dhanveer Singh, for committing offences punishable under Section 500 / 506 IPC. 12. It is pertinent to note that at the time of summoning of accused, Court has to see the case, the version/testimony of complainant, on its face value, which may be tested during cross- examination, in the course of further proceedings. Accordingly, directions of summoning aforesaid accused persons, including the present revisionist, i.e. Dhanveer Singh, for offences punishable under Section 500 / 506 IPC, have been issued by the ld. Trial Court. 13. In view of the aforesaid discussions, the ld. Trial Court, has rightly and correctly passed the impugned order, dated 15.10.2019, which was passed, after considering the testimony of the respondent/complainant B.S.Chauhan, and other witnesses, examined in complainant's evidence as well as statement of accused persons, including the revisionist, namely, Dhanveer Singh. Accordingly, there is no merit in the present revision petition. The impugned order, dated 15.10.2019, does not suffer from any infirmity. Hence, the present Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 8/9 revision petition is dismissed. 14. Copy of this judgment, alongwith Trial Court record, be sent to the Trial Court for information. 15. Revision file be consigned to Record Room. Announced in the open Court on 21 st May, 2022 (RAMESH KUMAR) Principal District & Sessions Judge North-East District, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi Cr. Rev. 49/2021 Dhanveer Singh vs. B.S. Gautam Page 9/9