Dinesh Chander Sharma vs Ashok Kumar on 3 January, 2020 Author: Anoop Chitkara Bench: Anoop Chitkara IN THE HIGH COURT OF HIMACHAL PRADESH, SHIMLA . Cr.MMO No.330/2017 Reserved on : 29.11.2019 Date of decision : 3.1.2020 Dinesh Chander Sharma ... Petitioner. Versus Ashok Kumar ...Respondent Coram: The Hon'ble Mr. Justice Anoop Chitkara, Judge. Whether approved for reporting?1 Yes For the Petitioner : Petitioner in person. For the Respondent : Dr. Lalit Kumar Sharma, Advocate, for Respondent No.2. Anoop Chitkara, Judge Challenging the order passed by Additional Sessions Judge, Una, dismissing the criminal revision filed under Section 397 of CrPC, and upholding the dismissal of complaint by Judicial Magistrate, the Petitioner, who is a practicing Advocate, has come up before this Court, seeking directions to Judicial Magistrate for issuance of process, to launch the prosecution for criminal defamation. 1 Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment? ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...2... 2. The gist of the case, apposite to decide the present petition, relates to . a petition filed by the respondent Ashok Kumar, in this Court, seeking quashing of summons issued in the previous defamation case, filed by the petitioner Shri Dinesh Chander Sharma, against the present respondent, Ashok Kumar. 3. In the earlier complaint filed by the present petitioner Dinesh Chander Sharma, against the present respondent Ashok Kumar and others, the Ld. Judicial Magistrate had issued a process under Section 204 CrPC and summoned the accused. After this, the Court ordered the notice of accusation for defaming the present petitioner. On receipt of the summons, the accused Ashok Kumar, (Respondent herein), had challenged the order of notice of accusation, in the High Court of HP, filing a petition under Section 482 of the CrPC, registered as Cr.MMO No.109/2009. In the said petition, Ashok Kumar leveled specific defamatory allegations against Sh. Dinesh Chander Sharma. 4. On reading the contents of such pleadings, the Petitioner Shri Dinesh Chander Sharma, found that the allegations leveled in the petition filed by Ashok Kumar lowered his reputation. Thus, Ashok Kumar committed an offence punishable under Section 500 IPC. Accordingly, Shri Dinesh Chander ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...3... Sharma filed a criminal complaint, seeking his prosecution for the offence of . defamation. 5. Vide order dated Dec 9, 2010, Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Court No.2, registered the said complaint as Complaint No.203-I-2010, and fixed the case for recording preliminary evidence. Vide the order dated Feb.2, 2012, Ld. Judicial Magistrate observed that he did not find any prima facie 6. to case against the accused, and dismissed the complaint. The petitioner challenged this order of dismissal by filing a Criminal Revision under Section 397 of the CrPC before the Court of Sessions. Vide order dated Jul 21, 2016, passed in Cr. Revision No. 05/2012, 38/13, learned Additional Sessions Judge, Una dismissed the petition, holding that he did not find any infirmity in the impugned order. 7. Challenging this order of dismissal, passed by Judicial Magistrate 1st Class (II), as well as Additional Sessions Judge, Una, the petitioner has come up before this Court, by filing the present petition, by invoking the inherent jurisdiction of this Court, under Section 482 of the CrPC. and Article 227 of Constitution of India. 8. I have heard Shri Dinesh Chander Sharma, petitioner in person, and counsel for the respondent. I have also waded through the entire record. ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...4... 9. I have gone through both the judgments, and I scribe the view taken . by them and do not find any infirmity in the same. Apart from the above, I am inclined to consider another aspect, while upholding the orders of dismissal. ANALYSIS AND REASONING: 10. I am of the considered opinion that the pleadings of the respondent- accused, Ashok Kumar, in the petition filed in this Court, challenging the issuance of a notice of accusation, do not amount to any violation of Section 499 / 500 of the Indian Penal Code. The relevant portion of the complaint, wherein the complainant reproduced the pleadings, are extracted as under: - "However, the accused firstly challenged the related order before the Fast Track Court, Una in revision No.19/207 and thereafter before the Hon'ble High Court, Shimla in Cr.MMO No.109/2009. The accused leveled various false allegations in the said petition as mentioned hereunder: - (a) "the evidence has been manufactured to harass the petitioner"- ... Para 4. (b) "The complainant without any reason implicated the petitioner." ... Para 2. (c) "The allegations in the complaint are patently absurd and inherently improbable.. " ...Para-6. ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...5... (d) "Hence the complaint is filed to settle the scores with malafide intentions."... . Para-11." 11. A bare reading of these pleadings shows that these are formal, being usual drafting of lawyers. The complainant, Shri Dinesh Chander Sharma, did not say that Ashok Kumar was well versed in legal writing. In non- institutional matters, it is the lawyers who draft for their clients. The executants just put their signatures, or thumb impressions, and mostly without even throwing a glance. There is no presumption, or evidence of the accused having either mensrea or knowledge of these pleadings. Even otherwise, the contents of the pleadings in issue do not constitute any defamation. 12. In Bhagat Singh Sethi & Ors. v. Zinda Lal , AIR 1966 J&K 106, a single bench of Jammu and Kashmir High Court observed:- 8. In this case all that the petitioner S.S. Sethi has stated in his application and affidavit is that the defendant had not fulfilled the terms of his contract; he had disposed of some portion of his property and had kept some in the name of his relatives to defraud his creditors. This by itself would not constitute defamation if understood in its true perspective. (I am not here emphasizing on the factual side of the case that these averments have not been denied by the respondent either in the complaint or in his statement before the Magistrate I am assuming them to be made and possibly being incorrect also). ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...6... We are taking these allegations as they occur in the application or as it is said at their face value. The case of S.S. Sethi is . covered by, exception 9 to Section 499 of the RFC which reads as under : "It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another, provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interest of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good." This principle is contained in the doctrine of privilege in law. In England statements made by witnesses or parties in the course of judicial proceedings whether they are in the form of pleadings of sworn testimonies are absolutely privileged and no action can be against a party or a witness for any allegation made by him or in the course of a statement or in a pleading. But the doctrine of absolute privilege about such matters has been held not to be applicable in India, where defamation is the subject-matter of a specific provision of the Penal Code. That absolute privilege cannot be enjoyed by litigants or witnesses in India as is done in England, reference may be made to ILR 49 Mad 728 : AIR 1926 Madras 906 (FB) and (1913) ILR 40 Cal 433 In the former case their Lordships overruled an earlier Full Bench decision of the same Court. (1913) ILR 36 Mad 216 and held that according to exception 8 to Section 499 I.P.C. defamatory statement in complaints to Magistrates are not absolutely privileged. Unless they are made in good faith, the complainant is guilty of defamation. They have further held that on matters specifically dealt with by the Penal Code such as this, the English common law does not apply. 9. In (1913) ILR 40 Cal 433 (Supra) it has been held that the English common law doctrine of absolute privilege does not obtain in the moffussil in India, and a defamatory statement made in bad faith by an accused, against whom a trial is pending in a criminal court, is not absolutely privileged, but is punishable under Section 499 of the I.P.C. 10. Absolute privilege not being applicable to cases under the Penal Code in India, we come to what is termed legally as ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...7... "qualified privilege" In India the authorities lay down that if to a pleading of a party certain matters are alleged which may not . strictly be correct but are made in good faith and are made to protect the interests of the maker, they are privileged and the person malting them cannot be prosecuted or convicted for defamation. Only few authorities may be mentioned in this behalf. 11. In (1900) ILR 22 All 234 in an application for the transfer of a criminal case the applicants alleged, with some apparent reason, that the case had been falsely got up against them by the complainant at the instigation of one Tjmrao Singh in order to prejudice them in their defence in a civil suit which Umrao Singh had caused to be brought against them. It was held that the statement did not amount to defamation, not because of the application of any principles of English Law for such principles did not apply to prosecutions for defamations under the I.P.C . but because the statement fell within the ninth exception to Section 499 of the I.P.C. A whole host of authorities has been discussed in this judgment. 12. Here also the petitioners allege and it has been so held by the learned Sessions Judge, that this criminal complaint has been lodged against the petitioners simply to coerce them into a compromise in the civil suit brought against the respondent. 13. In (1876) ILR 2 Mad 13 the plaintiffs and the defendants were the members of two firms, each creditors of an absconded debtor one B. The plaintiffs' firm brought a suit to recover the sum alleged to be due to them by the said B. and pending that suit the defendant's firm presented a petition to the court which contained the statement complained of, which was to the effect that the plaintiffs had prejudiced the petitioners by suing the said 6 for sums greatly in excess of their just claims against him. 14. It was held that as the defendants were creditors of an absconded debtor and deeply interested in seeing that his estate was not swept off in satisfaction of an excessive claim made by the earliest suitor, they, in presenting a petition ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...8... pointing out what they considered suspicious elements in the plaintiffs' claim against such debtor, were at all events entitled . to the qualified privilege of persons acting in good faith and making communications with a fair and reasonable purpose of protecting their own interest." 15. Here also the petitioner Swindra Singh has made the impugned allegation in good faith and with a view to protect the interests of the plaintiffs. 16. In AIR 1918 Nagpur 221(1) it has been laid down that a statement made by a party to a suit in good faith and for the protection of his interests, and which is relevant to the matter in issue, falls under Exception 9. Section 499 of the Penal Code and is privileged. In order to take such a statement out of the exception express malice must be proved. 17. In AIR 1925 Madras 246 it has been laid down that exception 9 applied to a case where a lawyer's notice was sent on behalf of the widow of a deceased Hindu in which the accused was charged with criminal breach of trust and theft of the properties of the deceased and he was threatened with civil and criminal proceedings and the accused sent in his reply through a vakil alleging that the widow was living an adulterous life and that she was discarded owing to her such conduct by her husband and that her daughter was not the daughter of the husband and that she had never lived with the deceased for about 25 years mid the accused, who was the deceased's nephew claimed under it will by the deceased. 18. In AIR 1948 Madras 469 it was held that in secure the protection of exception 9 to Section 499 fin allegations made in a written statement, it is necessary that the imputation should have been made in good faith and for the protection of the interest of the person making it or of any other person or for the public good. In this case Rajamannar, J. further held that there cannot be any rule of thumb to determine in a particular case whether an imputation is made in good faith or not Good faith is relative to a great extent and must be determined by the circumstances under which the imputation was made, the ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...9... social status and the level of education of the person making the imputation and his reasoning capacity. That the allegations . contained in the statements made by the petitioners are not established to be true is not tantamount to absence of good faith. 19. In AIR 1937 Rangoon 535 a lawyer on behalf of his client asked the witness of the other party whether his daughter had given birth to a child without marriage. The question was asked by the lawyer under the instructions of his client and with a belief that such question was permissible under Section 146(1) Evidence Act. The lawyer and his client were prosecuted under Section 500, Penal Code. It was not shown that the client made this imputation to any person other than the lawyer or that they made the imputation not in good faith. On these facts it was held that the accused persons could not, under the circumstances, be convicted under Section 500 and they were entitled to the benefit of Excep. 9 to Section 499 in the publication made by them of the defamation to their lawyer. 13. In Dr. P.Sharma v. P.S.Popli & Another , 2002 (1) Crimes 783, a single bench of Delhi High Court observed:- 10. Admittedly, copy of the complaint along with other connected documents were filed by the petitioner. The whole emphasis in the Special Leave Petition with the Special Leave Petition was to get the complaint quashed. It is apparent that the imputation was preferred in good faith by the petitioner to get the order of summoning quashed. This imputation cannot be said to have been made with the intention or knowledge to cause harm to the reputation of petitioner. The accusations were made before the Supreme Court which undoubtedly had authority over the subject matter in dispute. Thus, even if the allegations made in the complaint are taken to be true, in my view, no offence of defamation is made out. ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP ...10... 14. This Court is in full agreement with the ratio of law, propounded in . the judgments of Bhagat Singh Sethi v. Zinda Lal , and Dr.P.Sharma v. P.S.Popli , and endorse these, scribing a similar opinion. 15. Given the above analysis, there is no merit in the present petition, hence, dismissed. Pending application(s), if any, stand closed. (Anoop Chitkara), Judge. Jan 3, 2020(KS) ::: Downloaded on - 04/01/2020 20:27:20 :::HCHP