State vs Abhishek Solanki on 8 November, 2024 IN THE COURT OF SH. HARJOT SINGH AUJLA JMFC-11 (SOUTH-WEST) DWARKA COURTS: DELHI FIR No. 493/2021 PS Janakpuri Under Section 392 IPC State Vs. Abhishek Solanki CNR No. : DLSW020073322022 Crl. Case No. : 1342/2022 Date of institution of the case : 15.02.2022 Date of commission of offence : 17.10.2021 Name of the complainant : Sh. Suraj Kumar S/o Sh. Chander Dev Thakur Name of accused and address : Abhishek Solanki S/o Sh. Rishi Pal Solanki R/o H. No. RZ-D-4, Gali no.4, Dabri Extension, Delhi Offence complained of : Under Section 392 IPC Plea of the accused : Pleaded not guilty Final order : Acquittal Date of judgment : 08.11.2024 Argued by: Sh. Pankaj Gulia, Ld. APP for State. Sh. Rambir Singh, Ld. Counsel for the accused. JUDGMENT BRIEF STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE DECISION: State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 1 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH FACTUAL MATRIX- 1. The accused has been charge sheeted for committing offence under Section 392 IPC. 2. It has been alleged by the prosecution that on 17.10.2021 at about 6:15 PM at Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Pankha Road, Janakpuri, accused committed robbery by not paying the bill of Rs.500/- for filling the petrol in the car and also voluntarily caused fear of instant hurt to the complainant by showing a toy pistol to him in order to commit robbery and thereby, committed offence under Section 392 IPC. INVESTIGATION AND APPEARANCE OF ACCUSED 3. Complaint was made and FIR was registered. IO conducted the investigation. After completion of investigation, the present charge sheet was filed. Cognizance of offence was taken and accused was summoned to face the trial. 4. Thereafter, copy of charge sheet was supplied to the accused under Section 207 CrPC. After giving opportunity to State as well as accused for making submissions on charge, a charge for offences under Section 392 IPC was framed against the accused on 12.10.2022. However, on 26.04.2024, amended charge for the offence u/s 352 / 506 IPC was framed against the accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Since reasonable opportunity to lead the evidence was given to the prosecution side and the accused side was given the opportunity to rebut the evidence, no witness was re-examined and no further witness was examined qua the amended charge u/s 352 / 506 IPC. State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 2 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH PROSECUTION EVIDENCE 5. During the trial, prosecution led the following oral and documentary evidence against the accused to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt: - ORAL EVIDENCE PW-1 Suraj Kumar PW-2 Rohit PW-3 Nikku PW-4 Mohd. Ali Ansari PW-5 Rani Devi PW-6 ASI Brahmanand DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE Ex.PW1/A Statement of complainant Ex. PW 1/B Seizure memo of toy pistol Ex. PW 1/C Sketch of toy pistol Ex. PW 1/D Seizure memo of car Ex. PW 1/E Arrest memo Ex.PW1/F Personal search memo Ex. PW 1/G Receipt of Rs.500/- Ex. P1 Photographs of car (colly) Ex. PW 4/A Certificate u/s65B Indian Evidence Act (pen drive) Ex. PW 4/B Seizure memo of pen drive Ex. P4 Pen drive Ex. PW 4/A1 Certificate u/s 65B Indian Evidence Act (pen drive) Ex. PW 5/A Superdarinama of car Ex. PW 6/A Tehrir Ex. PW 6/B Site plan Ex. PW 6/C Disclosure statement of accused Ex. P2 Toy gun 6. Prosecution examined 06 witnesses to prove its case. 7. Prosecution examined complainant Suraj Kumar as PW-1. He deposed that he was residing with his family as tenant and originally belonged to village Ram Nagar Mahesh, PS Shree Nagar, Dist. Madhe State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 3 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH Pur, Bihar. He was working at Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Pankha Road, Janakpuri as salesman. He further deposed that he did not know anything more about the present case. The witness was cross examined by Ld. APP for State as he turned hostile. In his cross examination, he admitted that there are his signatures at point A on document Ex.PW1/A. In voluntary, he stated that police officials obtained his signatures on blank papers. He denied the suggestion that on 17.10.2021, he was on his duty at about 06:15PM, a car bearing registration no. DL 9CAD 3089 came at their petrol pump and driver of the said car told him to fill the petrol of 500 rupees and when he asked him about the payment after filling, he took a pistol and pointed at his chest, he told him after pushing him at backside "paise mange to goli mar dunga". He denied the suggestion that the driver of the said car had started his car and tried to go from there. He denied the suggestion that he was nervous and started shouting. He denied the suggestion that he with the help of other staff of petrol pump apprehended him and took the pistol from his hand. He denied the suggestion that they came to know that the name of said person was Abhishek Solanki S/o Sh.Rishi Pal Solanki R/o RZ D4 Gali No.4, Dabri Extension, Delhi and aged about 22 yrs. He denied the suggestion that they found a toy pistol after the checking of abovesaid pistol. He denied the suggestion that they told the entire incident to the manager of petrol pump and he made a call at 100 number. He denied the suggestion that police official reached at the spot and they handed over custody of apprehended person alongwith the toy gun to police officials. He denied the suggestion that accused had pushed him and threatened him to kill and refused to give him money of filling the petrol. Witness was confronted with the statement Ex.PW1/A from point B to B1 where it was so recorded. He denied the suggestion that police officials prepared site plan of place of incident Mark X at his instance. He denied the suggestion that police official seized the toy pistol recovered from possession of State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 4 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH accused vide memo Ex.PW1/B. He denied the suggestion that police official prepared sketch of toy pistol Ex.PW1/C. He denied the suggestion that police official seized the car of accused vide seizure memo Ex.PW1/D. He denied the suggestion that he handed over receipt of filling the petrol of Indian Oil Petrol Pump of Rs.500/- to police official and the same is Ex.PW1/G. He denied the suggestion that police official arrested and conducted personal search of accused in his presence vide Ex.PW1/E and PW1/F respectively. He denied the suggestion that police official told him for his medical examination but he did not get any injury that is why he stated that he did not wish to be checked up medically. He denied the suggestion that police official recorded his statement u/s 161 CrPC. Witness was confronted with statement Mark Y from point A to A1, where it was so recorded. After seeing the accused, witness submitted that the accused did not commit any offending act in his presence. Photographs of car bearing registration no. DL 9CAD 3089 Ex. P1 (colly) were shown to the witness and witness submitted that he had not seen the said car before that day. He admitted that document Ex.PW1/B to Ex.PW1/F were bearing his signatures at point A. In voluntary he stated that police officials obtained his signatures on blank papers. 8. Prosecution examined Rohit as PW-2. He had deposed that he did not remember the date of incident. At the time of incident, he was working as salesman at Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Pankha Road, Janakpuri. The incident happened between 3-4 PM. He further deposed that his colleague Suraj was filling the petrol in a car and when he asked money of the petrol, someone had shown pistol to him. Suraj had snatched the pistol from the car driver and he ran away from the spot due to fear. Car driver was also overpowered by Suraj. The accused was correctly identified by the witness. Police was called and accused was handed over to police. State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 5 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH Ld. APP for the State sought permission of the court to ask some leading questions to the witness regarding the date of incident and manner of apprehension of accused. The witness admitted that the incident occurred on 17.10.2021 at about 6:15 to 06:20 PM and accused ran after showing pistol and without paying charge of the petrol filled in his car. He denied the suggestion that he alongwith his associate Nikku had overpowered the accused. In voluntary, he stated that he ran away from the spot due to fear and had not apprehended the accused. He did not know whether recovered pistol was toy pistol. 9. Prosecution examined Nikku as PW-3. He deposed that at the time of incident, he was working as salesman at Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Pankha Road, Janakpuri. He did not remember the exact time of the incident, however, it was evening time and CCTV was installed in which the incident was captured. At the time of incident, he was filling fuel in some vehicle. Accused had filled up fuel of 500 rupees in his car. It was filled up by Suraj who was present at the spot as filling assistant. Suraj asked money for the fuel filled up in car of accused but accused did not give the money and pointed the pistol on Suraj and accused also put the pistol on head of the Suraj. Public present at the filling station fled due to fear. Suraj had snatched the pistol from accused and also apprehended the accused and 100 number call was made. Police came at the spot and accused was handed over to police. He further deposed that police also took the car of accused in possession. Police also seized the pistol used by accused. Photographs of the car bearing no. DL 9CAD 3089 were shown to witness and same were correctly identified by the witness. Photographs are Ex. P1 (colly). Pen drive available on record allegedly containing the video of the incident in question was tried to be played but it was not playable and the Technician from the computer branch stated that there is no State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 6 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH recording/video in the pen drive. 10. Prosecution examined Mohd. Ali Ansari as PW4. He deposed that on 17.10.2021, he was working as Assistant Manager at petrol pump, Indian Oil Pankha Road, Janakpuri. At about 6 PM, he received call from his employee Suraj who informed him that one customer, after filling petrol of Rs.500/-, is denying to make payment of the same and had shown pistol to threaten. On that day, he was on leave being Sunday and he was at his residence. He immediately came at petrol pump from his house. Thereafter, he got understand the matter from his staff. Beat officer was also present there and he had apprehended the person who was threatening to Suraj. Therefore, he called at 100 number. Police of PS Janakpuri came at the spot and conducted investigation. Police went to PS alongwith accused after the investigation. Later on, on next day, he gave CCTV footage in pen drive after procuring the same from the DVR of the CCTV camera. He issued certificate u/s 65B of Indian Evidence Act in this regard, which is Ex.PW4/A bearing his signature at point A. He also signed on seizure memo of the pen drive. Same is Ex.PW4/B bearing his signature at point A. Pen drive available on record was not having any footage as per the technician of computer branch. Witness submitted that he could produce the CCTV footage stored in laptop in another pen drive. Another pen drive containing the footage of whole incident was taken on record and same is Ex. P4. Witness again produced certificate u/s 65B of Indian Evidence Act. Same was also taken on record and exhibited as Ex.PW4/A1. Prosecution further failed to play the CCTV footage in the court. 11. Prosecution examined Rani Devi as PW5. She deposed that she was registered owner of car bearing no. DL 9C AD 3089. On 17.10.2020, accused Abhishek Solanki who was her neighbour asked State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 7 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH for her car for some urgent work. She gave her car to him on his request. Later on, she came to know that her car was involved in present case. She got released her car on superdari vide superdarinama Ex.PW5/A bearing her signature at point A. Car was correctly identified by the witness from photographs. Photographs are already Ex. P1 (colly). 12. Prosecution examined ASI Brahmanand as PW6. He deposed that on o 17.10.2021, he was posted as ASI in PS Janakpuri. On that day, he was on emergency duty from 8 am to 8 pm and he received a DD No. 63-A and thereafter he alongwith Ct. Sunil went to the spot i.e. Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Pankha Road, where he met with the complainant Suraj Kumar and other petrol pump staff, who handed over the accused and toy gun to him. Thereafter, he prepared sketch of the said toy gun, which is already Ex.PW-1/C bearing his signature at point B and further seized the same vide seizure memo already Ex.PW-1/B bearing his signature at point B. He had also seized one car bearing No. DL-9C-AD-3089 with key vide seizure memo already Ex.PW-1/D bearing his signature at point B. He seized the toy gun in a plastic box and sealed the same with the seal of BN and handed over the seal to Ct. Sunil. He further deposed that thereafter, he recorded statement of complainant Suraj at the spot, which is already Ex.PW- 1/A bearing his signature at point B. He had prepared tehrir over the same which is Ex.PW-5/A bearing his signature at point A. Thereafter, he handed over the tehrir to Ct. Sunil for registration of FIR. Ct. Sunil went to PS and got the FIR registered over the same and came back at the spot and handed over original tehrir and copy of FIR to him. Thereafter, he formally arrested the accused and conducted his personal search vide memo already Ex.PW-1/E and Ex.PW-1/F, both bearing his signature at point A. Further, he also recorded disclosure statement of the accused at the spot which is Ex.PW-5/C bearing his signature at point A. He further deposed that State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 8 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH he prepared site plan at the instance of complainant Suraj Kumar which is Ex.PW-5/B bearing his signature at point A and seized one receipt of Indian Oil which is already Ex.PW-1/G bearing his signature at point A. Thereafter, Ct. Sunil and Ct. Lokesh took the accused for medical examination in DDU Hospital, Hari Nagar and subsequently he was taken to PS Janakpuri. He deposited the case property in maalkhana PS Janakpuri. Thereafter, he recorded statement of witnesses under Section 161 Cr.PC. He further deposed that on the next day i.e.18.10.2021, he seized one pen drive Ex. P4 from Asstt. Manager, namely Mohd. Ansari, Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Pankha Road, already Ex.PW-4/B bearing his signature at point B. He also recorded his statement u/s 161 Cr.PC. Accused was later produced in Court and sent to JC. He concluded the investigation and filed the charge sheet in the concerned Court. Photographs of the car bearing No. DL-9CAD-3089 were shown to the witness which he correctly identified. Same are already Ex. P1 (colly). Witness had also correctly identified the toy gun which is Ex. P2. 13. Vide separate statement recorded under Section 294 Cr.P.C, accused person had admitted the documents i.e. register no. 19 Ex. A1, FIR no. 493/2021 Ex. P/A/1, Endorsement on rukka Ex. P/A/2, certificate u/s 65B of Indian Evidence Act Ex. P/A/3 and DD no. 63A dated 17.10.2021 Ex. P/A/4. Hence the above documents were ordered to be read in evidence without their formal proof. STATEMENT OF THE ACCUSED AND DEFENCE EVIDENCE 14. PE was closed by order of this court and thereafter, statement of accused was recorded u/s 313 Cr.P.C, wherein he refused the allegations levelled against him in toto. He further stated that he has State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 9 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH falsely been implicated in the present case. Accused opted not to lead defence evidence. FINAL ARGUMENTS 15. Matter was listed for final arguments. During the course of arguments, learned APP for the State navigated the attention of the court to the facts of the instant case and the evidence brought forth by the prosecution. It is argued by Ld. APP for State that the prosecution witnesses have categorically deposed against the accused and the accused is liable to be convicted for the offence u/s 352 / 506 IPC. Per-contra, Ld. counsel for accused argued that PW1/complainant is the key witness in the present case but he has not deposed against the accused and has failed to identify the accused. It is further argued that accused has been falsely implicated in the present matter and is liable to be acquitted. 16. I have heard learned APP for the State and learned Counsel for accused, perused the material placed on record and considered the submissions advanced. INGREDIENTS OF THE OFFENCE 17. Since criminal liability can be attached by proving each element of the section under which liability is sought to be enforced, I shall go on to appreciate the evidence- documentary and oral, in light of how compellingly it satisfies each of such ingredient, if at all. Section 352 IPC provides punishment for Assault and section 506 IPC provides punishment for Criminal Intimidation. Assault is defined in section 351 IPC and Criminal Intimidation is defined u/s 503 IPC as follows: - Section 351 IPC is reproduced as under: - 351. Assault. --Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely that State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 10 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that he who makes that gesture or preparation is about to use criminal force to that person, is said to commit an assault. Explanation. -- Mere words do not amount to an assault. But the words which a person uses may give to his gestures or preparation such a meaning as may make those gestures or preparations amount to an assault. Section 503 IPC is reproduced as under: - 503. Criminal intimidation. --Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to do any act which that person is legally entitled to do, as the means of avoiding the execution of such threat, commits criminal intimidation. Explanation. -- A threat to injure the reputation of any deceased person in whom the person threatened is interested, is within this section. 18. Key ingredients of offences u/s 351 IPC and 503 IPC are as follows: - a. making of gesture/preparation by one person, b. with intention or knowledge that other person present, c. will apprehend that criminal force will be used against him. d. threatening other with fear of injury to person, property or State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 11 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH reputation. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE 19. It is trite law that the burden always lies upon the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of acceptable evidence and that the law does not permit the Court to punish the accused on the basis of moral conviction or on account of suspicion alone. Also, it is well settled that accused is entitled to benefit of every reasonable doubt in the prosecution story and such doubt entitles him to acquittal. 20. In the present case, the accused person had been initially charged for committing offence punishable under 392 IPC which was later amended to charge under section 352 / 506 IPC. It is the case of the prosecution that on 17.10.2021 at about 6:15 PM at Indian Oil Petrol Pump, Pankha Road, Janakpuri, accused refused to pay for the petrol filled in his car and showed one pistol to the fuel attendant namely Suraj, threatening him. The said pistol was later discovered to be a Toy Pistol. 21. Prosecution examined complainant Suraj as PW1. During his examination in chief, he stated that he did not know anything about the present case. He failed to identify the accused. He was declared hostile and was cross examined by Ld. APP for the State. He stated that accused did not commit any offending act in his presence. He denied all the suggestions given by Ld. APP for state thereby not supporting the case of the prosecution. In the examination in chief, he did not even mention the fact the accused was present at the spot on the date of incident. He did not even depose to the fact the accused assaulted him or that he was criminally intimidated by the accused by State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 12 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH showing any pistol. It is apparent from the record that the complainant has not supported the case of the prosecution. He stated that accused has not committed any offence. The offences under section 352 / 506 IPC are individual specific and in case where the person allegedly assaulted and intimidated is deposing that he is not assaulted and intimidated by the accused, the testimony of remaining witnesses of the incident will not support/improve the case of the prosecution. Therefore, it can be safely said that nothing material has been brought on record by the prosecution to link the accused with the accusation of the offence or to show his presence at the time of the incident. 22. It has to be understood that the burden is always on the prosecution to prove the guilt of the accused beyond the shadow of reasonable doubt, by leading positive evidence. This burden never shifts upon the accused to establish his innocence. On account of the fact that the star witness of the incident has not supported the case of the prosecution, the prosecution case has suffered a fatal blow which goes to the root of the matter. Mere suspicious, howsoever, strong it might be, cannot replace the standard of proof required to establish the guilt of an accused in a trial for commission of a criminal offence. 23. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled as " Bihari Nath Goswami Vs. Shiv Kumar Singh And Ors. (2004) 9SCC 186 observed the following: "The golden thread which runs through the web of administration of justice in criminal cases is that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in the case, one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his innocence, the view of which is favourable to the accused should be adopted. The State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 13 of 14 Digitally HARJOT signed by SINGH HARJOT SINGH paramount consideration of the Court is to ensure that miscarriage of justice is prevented. A miscarriage of justice which may arise from acquittal of the guilty is no less than from the conviction of an innocent." 24. Further, no material evidence has been led by the prosecution to prove that accused person had committed the offence. The complainant is a star witness and he has failed to support the case of prosecution. The CCTV footage of the incident could not be played in open court and was found blank. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the benefit of doubt is given to the accused person. 25. In view of the aforesaid, accused Abhishek Solanki is entitled to the benefit of doubt and is hereby acquitted for offence punishable under Section 352 / 506 IPC. Pronounced in the open court HARJOT Digitally signed by HARJOT on 08.11.2024. SINGH SINGH (HARJOT SINGH AUJLA) JMFC-11 South West District, Dwarka Courts, New Delhi State v. Abhishek Solanki FIR no. 493/2021 page 14 of 14