Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs Narendra Bansal on 14 October, 2023 IN THE COURT OF SH. LOVLEEN, ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE-03 (SOUTH EAST), SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI CNR No: DLSE01-005354-2020 CRL. REVISION No. 301/2020 IMTIYAZ AHMED ANSARI S/o Late Mr. Sirajuddin Ansari Proprietor of M/s. Ellora Creations # F-23/1, Okhla Industrial Area-II, New Delhi-110020. .... Revisionist VERSUS 1. Narendra Bansal S/o Late Mr. Bhanwar Lal Bansal Intex Technologies India Ltd. A-61, Okhla Industrial Area-II, New Delhi-110020. 2. The State of NCT Delhi ...Respondents Date of institution : 26.11.2020 Date of Reserving judgment : 11.07.2023 Date of Pronouncement : 14.10.2023 Decision : Allowed. For Revisionist : Sh. Ajay Kumar Mayer, Ld. Counsel for revisionist. For Respondents:Sh. Saurabh pal, Ld. Counsel for R-1. Sh. A.T. Ansari, Ld. Addl. PP for State/R-2. Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 1....of 18 JUDGMENT 1. Vide this judgment the undersigned shall dispose of the revision petition filed under Section 397 and 400 Cr.P.C. against the order dated 10.07.2020 passed by the Court of Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate-02, South-East, Saket District Courts, Delhi in criminal case no. 6220/2017, PS OIA, titled Narender Bansal Vs. Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari & Ors., whereby Ld. Magistrate ordered the summoning of the revisionist herein to stand trial for the commission of offence punishable u/s 500 IPC. 2. As per records, the respondent No. 1 filed a complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C. seeking summoning and punishment of the revisionist as well as seven other persons for the commission of offences punishable u/s 499 / 500 / 501 / 502 / 34 IPC r/w 120B IPC . The causes of action, narrated by the respondent No. 1 in the said complaint, were certain public notices and a newspaper article published in certain newspapers wherein certain false accusations were levelled against him by the revisionist. The Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate took cognizance and proceeded to record pre- summoning evidence. Subsequently, vide the impugned order, the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate was pleased to summon the revisionist only to stand trial for the offence punishable u/s 500 IPC. GROUNDS OF REVISION 3. The grounds cited by revisionist are as under :- (i) Because the impugned order dated 10-07-2020 passed by the Ld. M.M. suffers from illegality and impropriety and is unsustainable in law. (ii) Because the impugned order dated 10-07-2020 passed by the Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 2....of 18 Ld. M.M. is full of assumption and presumption. (iii) Because at the time of passing the impugned order dated 10-07- 2020, the Ld. M.M. failed to consider that respondent No.1 has falsely claimed in his complaint that he never represented himself to be the sole and absolute owner of the Property bearing No. D-205, Noida, Sector-63, U.P. In this context, it is contrarily submitted that the respondent No 1 had represented himself to be the sole and absolute owner of the Property bearing No. D-205, Noida, Sector-63, UP. and this averment was confirmed by Mr. Sunil Chopra and Mr. Munish Kher, who are the witnesses in the Agreement to Sell dated 28-09-2016, in their statement given to the Enquiry Officer, P.S.-Okhla Industrial Area, which is mentioned in the Status Report dated 25-02-2017. (iv) Because, Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate failed to consider that the respondent No. 1 has falsely claimed in his complaint that no offence of any nature was committed by him (respondent No 1) in a land deal. In this context, it is submitted that the respondent No.1 alongwith other Directors and employees of M/s Intex Technologies (India) Ltd. had committed the offences specified in the case FIR No.78/2017, Us-420/34 IPC . P.S EOW, Delhi registered against Mr. Narendra Bansal and his associates. They had further committed the offences by wrongfully and illegally trying to forfeit the hard earned money of the petitioner, which led to addition of the section 120-B / 406 IPC in the above said case, hence, the illegal acts of commission of various offences have been proved, which are being investigated by the police. (v). Because, at the time of passing the impugned order dated 10.07.2020, the Ld. M.M. failed to consider that the respondent No.1 has Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 3....of 18 falsely claimed in his complaint that he never entered into an Agreement to Sell dated 28.09.2016. The respondent No.1 also falsely claimed in his complaint that no loan has been availed by him (respondent No.1) from any financial institution to the tune of Rs.208 Crore In this context, it is contrarily submitted that the respondent No. 1 is the Director of M/s Intex Technologies (India) Ltd, having 95.29697% shares holding therein. The section 11 IPC defines as:- 11. "Person"-The word "person" includes any Company or Association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not Further, the responsibility of the Directors of the company clearly defined in Section 141 of the Negotiable Instrument Act, which states that every person who, at the time of commission of the offence, was in charge of, and responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Further, where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. The Agreement to sell dated 28.09.2016 was executed by Mr. Karamveer duly authorized by the Board of Directors of M/s Intex Technologies (India) Ltd., which is always headed/chaired by the respondent No.1 being its Director of 95.29697 % share holding of the company. The loan of Rs.208 Crore is evident from the Certificate dated 12.04.2017 issued by M/s NKS & Company owned by Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 4....of 18 Mr. Nitesh Kumar Sinha, Company Secretary, which was also confirmed from the letter dated 15.04.2017 issued by M/a Intex Technologies (India) Ltd. (vi) Because, at the time of passing the impugned order dated 10.07.2020, the Ld. M.M. failed to consider that the respondent No. 1 has falsely claimed in his complaint that all 7 alleged persons mentioned in the complaint case had published the Public Notices dated 21-04-2017 in Hindustan Times (Ex.CW-1/D) and The Economic Times (Ex.CW-1/E) in close cooperation and co-ordination to each other (7 accused persons) with the common intention to defame the respondent No.1. He further falsely claimed that the contents of the Public Notices are per'se defamatory amongst other as set out in the complaint at Para No.8. He further falsely claimed that the alleged persons are well educated, Journalist belonging to public life and it was well within their knowledge that the contents of the defamatory public notices are false. Thereafter, another news article was published in Veer Arjun on 10- 06-2017. In this context, it is submitted that the Public Notice was got published with a view to rule out any other transaction in respect of the property in question. Ultimately, it came to know M/s Intex Technologies (India) Ltd. with the consent and authority of the respondent No.1 and other Directors of the company had earlier entered into an agreement to sell dated 28-01-2016 executed in favour of Mr. Sunil Chopra in respect of the Property in question which was concealed by the petitioner while entering into the agreement to sell dated 28-09-2016 with the petitioner herein, which is established from the letter dated 26-04-2016 issued by M/s Intex Technologies (India) Ltd. Hence, the decision for publication of the public notice in the daily newspapers was right and Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 5....of 18 lawful. This, the impugned summoning order is liable to be set aside out- rightly. vii) Because, the Ld. M.M. failed to consider that petitioner herein had clearly clarified that the complaint filed by the respondent No.1 herein falls in Exception 8 to Section 499 IPC which clearly indicates that it is not a defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with regard to the subject-matter of accusation. (viii) Because, the Ld. M.M. failed to consider that the public notice only set outs the facts which are true to the records and what has been stated therein is covered by the Ninth Exception under Section 400 IPC In other words it is submitted that the imputations therein were in good faith and for the protection of the interests of the Petitioners and all other persons including the public. (ix) Because, Ld. MM. failed to consider that on 20.09.2016 Mr. Narendra Bansal along with Mr. Munish Kher & Mr. Sunil Chopra had come to the office of petitioner. The respondent himself stated that he is the sole absolute owner of the Industrial property No. 205, Block D, Phase-3, Sector-63, New Okhla Industrial Development Area. District Gautam Budh Nagar, UP. and further told/assured that the property in question is free from all sorts of encumbrance, sale, line, gift, disputes, litigations, private secured loans, securities, guarantees etc. This fact has also been verified/ corroborated by the Enquiry officer in his status report dated 25.02.2017. The details concerning the litigation instituted by petitioner against respondent were true to the judicial records and therefore it could not be Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 6....of 18 said that the public notice defamed the respondent in any manner. (x) It is submitted that among the witnesses examined by the complainant / respondent at the pre-summoning stage; CW2 Sh. Amitabh Khurana stated in his statement that " I am currently employed with Intex Technologies India Ltd. Mr. Narendra Bansal is the founder of Intex Technologies India I Know Mr. Narendra Bansal for the past about 17 & ½ Years and I have associated with Mr. Narendra Bansal as part of Intex Technologies India Ltd. I have close professional as well as personal terms with Mr. Narendra Bansal since the last 17 & ½ Years." He is the employee of complainant Sh. Narender Bansal and known to him for last 17& ½ Year." CW3 Sh. Atul Jain stated in statement that " I was working as CFO with Intex Technologies India Ltd. Since 2011, now 1 am working as consultant finance and legal Since 2017. I and Mr. Narender Bansal have close personal and profession terms since last 07 years. Mr. Narender Bansal successfully established Intex as a leading brand in the market. " "When I visited the office, he told me that he represented himself as owner and he showed me agreement to sell dated 28.09.2016 wherein he was not even a signatory. The agreement was also entered into between the company and the accused, Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari. He further also showed me certain documents with the help of the documents retained in the office of Intex which made amply clear that the property in question was owned by Intex and not him. His staff and he also demonstrated that property was released from encumbrances as assured by the office bearers of Intex. I was also shown the NOCs issued by the all the concerned banks including the lead banker SBI. I had also asked him about the allegation of loan of Rs. 208 Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 7....of 18 crores. He told me that he has not taken any such ever in his personal capacity" CW4 Stated in his statement that " My qualification is CA. I am working with Intex Technologies India Ltd since 2013. Now, I working as Chief Financial officer since September 2018, I know Mr. Narender Bansal Since my association with the company in 2013. Mr. Narender Bansal successfully establish Intex as a leading brand in the market. I am looking after the accounts of Mr. Narender Bansal and I even care take care of the correspondences initiated between the department of accounts and the auditors. The auditors for Mr. Narender Bansal is Andros and company which is being taken care by CA Bhavuk Garg. I have today brought on record certificate issued by the auditors which clearly states that the property bearing no. D 205 Sector 63, Noida is not owned by Mr. Narender Bansal. The document is now exhibited as Ex.CW4/A and the signatures of Mr. Bhavuk Garg is at point A." (xi) Because, Ld. M.M. failed to consider that all CWS are the employees of the respondent who are deposing in court at the behest of the Respondent no.1. (xii) Because, Ld. M.M. failed to consider that "CW4 stated that no loan from any consortium of banks have been obtained by Mr. Narender Bansal in his personal capacity keeping the aforesaid property as a collateral or mortgaged for the same purpose." In fact, Respondent no 1 who is holding 95% of shares in the company was representing fraudulently in the guise of company (Intex Technologies India Ltd.) and took loan on the said property from various banks. Further, being the 95% shareholder of the company, he was having absolute charge of the affair of Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 8....of 18 company and was not only representing him as absolute owner of the said land but also mortgaged it to consortium of bank for taking loan. It is also pointed out that Narendar Bansal and his wife were guarantor for obtaining loan from banks for their company. (xiii) Because, the Ld. M.M. failed to consider that a perusal of the public notice shows that it only inform the readers that petitioner has entered in the transaction of above plot and has already paid the huge amount of Rs. 4.70 CR. It was to inform the persons having claim in the property similar to petitioner. The notice was given only to safeguard the interests of petitioner and general public at large dealing with the said property. (xiv) Because, the Ld. M.M. failed to consider that after publication of the said notice, petitioner came to know that one Sunil Chopra had entered into transaction of the said property prior to the petitioner and this fact was suppressed by respondent and his company at the time of entering into transaction of said property with petitioner. (xv) Because, the Ld. MM failed to consider that moreover, it is merely a communication gap between the petitioner and his counsel and there is no intention to defame the respondent. (xvi) Because, Ld. M.M. failed to consider that it is in fact the respondent who in garb of company has cheated complainant of huge sum of money and to pressurize him and avoid transfer the property in question to petitioner, is filing all sorts of false and frivolous litigations against him. (xvii) Because the impugned order has been passed not only in complete disregard to the facts of the case but also on the basis of a complete misunderstanding of the law relating to libel and defamation is contained under section 499 of IPC and as enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 9....of 18 and various High Courts as to what constitutes an offence of libel and/or defamation. (xviii) Because the Ld. Trial Court completely failed to appreciate that publication of the public notice dated 21.04.2017 (which has allegedly caused harm and damage to the reputation of the respondent no. 1) was a legal necessity to avoid creation any further third-party rights on the subject Property and also to inform the lenders and the creditors about the interest of petitioner in the subject Property. (xix) Because the Ld. Trial Judge failed to appreciate that the purpose of the publication of the said public notice was purely and solely to protect the interest of petitioner in the subject Property in as much as the petitioner had paid a substantial amount of money to respondent no. 1 and the Company towards purchase of the said Plot. (xx) Because the Ld. Trial Judge failed to appreciate that the publication of the said notice was not intended to harm, damage or defame the respondent no. 1 or the Company. Ld. Trial Judge failed to appreciate the publication of the public notice was necessary and in the public interest in as much as admittedly respondent no. 1 had availed loans from several public sector banks viz State Bank of India, South Ext. Branch, New Delhi and financial institution by placing the subject Property as collateral. (xxi) Because Ld Trial Court failed to appreciate that the complainant /respondent no.1 is the Chairman cum-managing director holding more than about 95% of the issued, subscribed and paid up capital of M/s Intex Technologies (India) Ltd. and that the Board of Directors, management. employees and staff of the Company are accustomed to at in accordance with the directions and instruction of the respondent no. 1. Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 10....of 18 (xxxii) Because Ld Trial Court failed appreciate that the Company acting through respondent no. 1 has entered into the Agreement with the petitioner for sale of plot no. D-205, Sector-63, Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar, U.P. for a total consideration of Rs.9,20,00,000/- (Rupees Nine Crores Twenty Lakhs only) and pursuant to the said Agreement has received a sum of Rs. 4,70,00,000/- (Rupees Four Crores Seventy Lakhs only) from the petitioner/his son. (xxxiii) Because Ld Trial Court failed to appreciate that the entire negotiation for the transaction of sale of the subject Property in favour of petitioner was conducted by respondent no. 1 on behalf of the Company and the said Agreement was executed by one Mr. Karam Veer under the directions and instructions of respondent no. 1. It is on record that at the time of execution of the Agreement, respondent no. 1 represented and assured petitioner that the subject Property was free from all encumbrances and that the title of the subject Property was free and marketable and a clause to this effect was duly incorporated in the Agreement: (xxxiv) Because the Ld Trial Court failed to appreciate that out of the said part payment a sum of Rs. 1,20,00,000 (Rupees One Crore Twenty Lakhs only) have been paid in cash by petitioner directly to respondent no. 1 in front of Mr. Sunil Chopra and Mr. Munish Kher who are the brokers in between the petitioner and the respondent for the transaction. (xxxv) Because the Ld Trial Court failed to appreciate that the petitioner was advised by his lawyers that it was necessary and prudent to issue a public notice in the newspapers to inform the general public and all concerned that petitioner had entered into an agreement with the Company acting through respondent no. 1 to purchase the subject Property and has Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 11....of 18 paid substantial consideration to the respondent no. 1 and the Company. (xxxvi) Because Ld Trial Judge has proceeded to issue summons against the petitioner for facing trial for offence punishable under section 500 IPC by accepting the contentions and pleadings in the complaint without even ascertaining prima facie the truthfulness and veracity of the contents of the public notice which is alleged to have caused damage and harm to the reputation of the respondent no. 1. (xxxvii) BECAUSE the impugned summoning order is also in the teeth of the provisions of the Companies Act, 2013 . It is stated that as per section 2(60)(v) of the Companies Act, 2013 a person shall be an officer of the Company libel to any penalty or punishment by way of imprisonment. fine or otherwise, in whose advice, directions or instructions the Board of Directors of a Company is accustoms to Act. In the present case the respondent no. 1 is admittedly, the Chairman cum-managing director of the Company holding more than about 95% of the issued, subscribed and paid up capital of the Company and that the Board of Directors, management, employees and staff of the Company are accustomed to act in accordance with the directions and instruction of the respondent no. 1. In view of the said admitted fact mentioning of the respondent no. 1 in his capacity as the managing director of the Company was bonafide and in good faith and was neither libelous nor calculated to cause damage or harm to the reputation of the respondent no.1. (xxxviii) Because the Ld. Trial has formed his opinion that there was enough material to proceed with the case and to issue summons to the petitioner to face trial for the offences permissible under section 500 of IPC purely on the basis of the deposition of the witnesses who are employees Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 12....of 18 and officers directors of the Company. The Ld. Trial Court has failed to appreciate that the statement of the said witnesses cannot be relied upon on account of the fact that the said witnesses are in the pay roll of the Company and receive salary and remunerations from the Company and are also accustomed to act in accordance with the directions and instruction of the respondent no. 1. (xxxix) Because the Ld. Trial has failed to appreciate that it is a settled preposition of law that in case of a fraud and illegality committed by a Company the corporate veil of the Company can be pierced and the person behind such fraud and illegality can be brought to book. In the present case clearly a serious and grave fraud has been committed by the respondent no. 1, Company and other officers of the Company upon the petitioner. Further, as already stated the respondent no.1 owns and holds more than 95% of the issued, subscribed and paid up capital of the Company and owns and controls the Company. In backdrop of the said facts, mentioning the name of the respondent no. 1 in the public notice is a squarely covered under the exceptions to section 499 of the IPC and cannot by any stretch of imagination be said to be intended to cause harms or damage to the reputation of the respondent no. 1. The mentioning of the name of the respondent No. 1 was purely statement of fact. 4. A prayer for setting aside the impugned order dated 10.07.2020 has been made on behalf of revisionist. 5. Written submissions were filed by respondent No. 1. He relies upon observations made in Subramanian Swamy Vs. Union of India, Ministry of Law & Ors. - MANU/SC/0621/2016 ; Balraj Khanna & Ors. Vs. Moti Ram , 1971 (3) SCC 399. Ved Kumar Gupta and Ors. Vs. Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 13....of 18 Ashok Kumar Aggarwal and Anr. 2009 SCC OnLine Del 957. 6. This Court has considered the above submissions and has gone through the records, including the TCR. 7. It would be appropriate to narrate the facts of the case before proceeding to analyze the arguments. As per TCR, on 21.04.2017, two public notices were published in newspapers 'Hindustan Times' and 'The Economic Times' at the instance of the revisionist. Vide the said public notices, the revisionist made it known to the public at large that the respondent No. 1, who is the Managing Director of Intex Technologies India Ltd., represented to him that he is the sole and absolute owner of a vacant plot No. D-205, Sector -63, Noida and that respondent No. 1 entered into an agreement to sell the same to him on 28.09.2016 while claiming that the said plot was free from all encumbrances / loan / liens. The revisionist further made it known to the public at large that subsequently, he came to know that respondent No. 1 had availed a loan of Rs. 208 crore against the said plot from various banks. The revisionist requested the public at large to notify him if any other person has any claim against, into or upon the said plot by virtue of any Sale Agreement, contract, mortgage, lien, charge or otherwise. On 10.06.2017, an article was published in a newspaper Vir Arjun wherein it was narrated that the revisionist was enticed to enter into an Agreement to Sell by respondent No. 1 with respect to the above mentioned plot without revealing the fact that he (respondent No. 1) had previously availed loans from various banks against the above mentioned plot. The article further narrates that the revisionist lodged a complaint with Economic Offences Wing against respondent No. 1 for the above misconduct and an FIR has been registered in this regard. Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 14....of 18 7.1. The respondent No.1 then filed the complaint u/s 200 Cr.P.C. against the revisionist and others for the commission of offences punishable u/s 499 / 500 / 501 / 502 / 34 IPC r/w 120B IPC . In the said complaint, the respondent No.1 claims that the said public notices as well as the newspaper article are libelous in nature as the revisionist has made false imputations against him. The respondent No. 1 further claims that he is not the owner of the said plot, nor he ever represented himself to be the owner of the same to the revisionist. Respondent No.1 further claims that the said plot is exclusively owned by Intex Technologies India Ltd., whose Chairman / Managing Director is himself. Respondent No. 1 further claims that he never entered into any Agreement to Sell the said plot to the revisionist on 28.09.2016, nor has he availed any loan to the tune of Rs. 208 crores against the said plot. Claiming that all the said imputations have led to his defamation in society at large, respondent No. 1 sought the summoning of revisionist and others as accused persons. 7.2 In support of his allegations, respondent No. 1 examined himself as a witness in the Court of Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate concerned. He also examined three other witnesses in order to corroborate his claims. The Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate thereafter directed an Enquiry u/s 202 Cr.P.C. On 03.10.2019, the SHO concerned filed a report to the effect that at the instance of revisionist an FIR No. 78/2017 PS EOW u/s 420 / 34 IPC has already been registered in respect of the defrauding of the revisionist to the tune of Rs. 4.70 crores on the pretext of sale of said plot. It was further reported that respondent No.1 is a shareholder to the tune of 95.03% of Intex Technologies India Ltd. It was further reported that Intex Technologies India Ltd. had obtained a total loan of Rs. 208 crores from Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 15....of 18 various banks against the said plot. 7.3 Vide a detailed order dated 10.07.2020, the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate was pleased to order summoning of revisionist herein to stand trial for the commission of offence punishable u/s 500 IPC. 8. Having narrated the facts of the case, this court proceeds to analyze the material available with the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate at the time of passing the impugned order. At the very outset, it must be noted by this Court that prima facie the newspaper article, which was published on 10.06.2017 in newspaper 'Vir Arjun', does not seem to have been published at the instance of the revisionist herein. It seems like an independent report. Accordingly, it must be held that the revisionist could not have been summoned to face trial u/s 500 IPC for the publication of the said article. 9. Now, the two public notices dated 21.04.2017, published in 'Hindustan Times' and "The Economic Times' at the instance of revisionist, are left to be considered. The intent and purpose of publication of said two notices, as could be gathered from the language used therein, has been described in brief in the afore-going paragraphs. In respect of the said two notices, the respondent No.1 claims that the same were defamatory in nature as the revisionist had made false declarations therein. Respondent No.1 claims that the owner of the said plot is Intex Technologies India Ltd. And not himself, that it was Intex Technologies India Ltd. which had taken loan against the said plot and that Intex Technologies India Ltd. had entered into an Agreement to Sell the said plot (to revisionist) and not himself. 10. It seems that the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate got swayed by the above claims at the time of ordering the summoning of the revisionist. Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 16....of 18 The Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate failed to consider the report filed by the SHO concerned u/s 202 Cr.P.C. wherein it is categorically mentioned that the respondent No. 1 is the Managing Director and majority shareholder, to the extent of 95.30% holdings, in Intex Technologies India Ltd.; and that Intex Technologies India Ltd. had availed a loan of Rs. 208 crores against the said plot. The above facts, brought on record by the SHO concerned, are extremely relevant and have a direct bearing on the fate of the complaint made by the respondent No. 1. Reason being the fact that Intex Technologies India Ltd. is the alter ego of respondent No. 1, respondent No. 1 being the Managing Director and majority shareholder in the said company. It is difficult to believe that Intex Technologies India Ltd. could avail a loan of Rs. 208 crore against the said plot without the knowledge and consent of respondent No. 1. It is equally difficult to believe that Intex Technologies India Ltd. could negotiate with any alien (like the revisionist herein) for the sale of said plot without the knowledge and consent of respondent No. 1. It is equally difficult to believe that Intex Technologies India Ltd. could execute an Agreement to Sell dated 28.09.2016 in favour of the revisionist while withholding the information regarding existing encumbrances / charges on the said plot without the knowledge and consent of respondent No. 1. The above facts necessitated the piercing of corporate veil in order to reveal the actual fact and circumstances as the misconduct and impropriety of respondent No. 1 is writ large in the entire transaction, so much so that an FIR No. 78/2017, Us-420/34 IPC . P.S EOW, Delhi came to be registered against respondent No.1 and others in respect of the above transaction. Reliance is placed on Balwant Rai Saluja and Anr. Vs. Air India Ltd. and others (2014) 9 SCC 407 and Delhi Airport Metro Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 17....of 18 Express Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. 2023 SCC Online Del 1619. 11. Had the Metropolitan Magistrate pierced the Corporate Veil, he would surely have noticed that the Ninth Exception to Section 499 IPC came into play before him so as to shield the revisionist from any prosecution u/s 500 IPC with respect to the publication of said two public notices dated 21.04.2017. Unfortunately, the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate failed to notice the said facts, which error lead him into summoning the revisionist. Apparently, the impugned order dated 10.07.2020 is erroneous and is liable to be set aside. 12. As such, the present revision petition stands allowed. The impugned order dated 10.07.2020, passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate is hereby set aside. 13. Trial Court Record be sent back along with a copy of this judgment. 14. This file be consigned to Record Room. Dictated and Announced in open Court on 14.10.2023 (Lovleen) ASJ-03 (South East), Saket Courts, New Delhi Crl. Revision No: 301/2020 Imtiyaz Ahmed Ansari vs. Narender Bansal page no. 18....of 18