Smt. Sundari Ishwar vs Tapesh Sengupta on 22 April, 2024 1 KABC0C0000982006 IN THE COURT OF THE X ADDL.C.M.M. MAYO HALL UNIT, AT BENGALURU Dated: This the 22nd day of April 2024 PRESENT: Smt. ANJALI SHARMA.V.S B.B.A.(Hons.), LL.B.(Hons.), X Addl. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengaluru City. C.C.No.22694/2006 Complainant - Smt. Sundari Ishwar W/o A.J Ishwar Kumar, 41 years, "Sri Rajarajeshwari" No.21, Income Tax Layout, Sadanand Nagar, Bengaluru - 560 038. /vs/ Accused 1. Tapesh Sengupta, Major, Chairman Ab Initio HR Solutions (P) Ltd. No.507, B and C, 5th Floor, Kakad Chambers, 132, Dr.Annie Besant Road, Worli, Mumbai - 400 018. 2. Vineeta Sengupta, Major W/o.Tapesh Sengupta, Director, Ab Initio HR Solutions (P) Ltd. No.507, B and C, 5th Floor, Kakad Chambers, 132, Dr.Annie Besant Road, Worli, Mumbai - 400 018. 3. Amal Das, Major, Director Ab Initio HR Solutions (P) Ltd. No.507, B and C, 5th Floor, Kakad Chambers, 132, Dr. Annie Besant Road, Worli, Mumbai - 400 018. (Case against accused no.1 and 2 split up) JUDGMENT 1. This is the private complaint filed under section 200 of Cr.P.C 2 against the accused no.1 to 3 alleging the offence punishable u/S. 500 of IPC. Case against A1 and 2 was split up on 30.09.2023. 2. It is the case of the complainant that: (a) Complainant hails from a respected and well known family from Chennai. She is married to Sri. Ishwar Kumar who also hails from equally illustrious family from Calcutta. Her husband is a graduate of Commerce from St. Xavier's College and acquired his Masters Degree in MBA from the prestigious IIMB. He has worked with various prestigious companies and had held key positions. He is one of the core member of the IIM Alumni Association. Complainant submitted that she has associated herself spiritual and social service activities. The complainant and her husband are members of many prestigious and respected groups and have built a high reputation for themselves in the society. (b) The accused no.1 to 3 being the Directors of M/s. Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd., had engaged the services of Sri. Ishwar Kumar as a Retainer (Consultant) to look after their operations at Bengaluru. He immensely developed the business of M/s.Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd. After six months, he disassociated himself from the accused as they did not honour their commitment towards him. During the time Sri. Ishwar Kumar was associated with the said firm, accused No.1 got acquainted with the complainant and requested her to help his company and to take up certain assignments for which she would be remunerated. The complainant accepted the offer and agreed to chip in her services by assisting her husband on the 3 task of the firm to develop the business. In fact, it was because of her contribution and work, that the company was able to make tremendous progress. She was allotted an official email address of M/s.Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd., in the name of "sundariishwar@abinitiopeople.com" and later changed to "sundariishwar@chrglobal.co.in" when the company changed its name. It was configured officially and allotted to the complainant by the company. (c) After Sri. Ishwar Kumar disassociated himself with the accused, the complainant also severed her ties with the accused and their companies. Accused then got into a criminal conspiracy to defame and tarnish the image and reputation of the complainant and her husband and to compel them to act as per their dictates and to compel the complainant if possible to give up her claim against the remuneration payable to her in terms of the assurance given to her by the accused. They published an advertisement in Times of India and Economic Times on 31-01-2006 in Bengaluru as under the caption "Public Notice". In the said public notice, the accused warned the general public that they have terminated the services of Sri. Ishwar Kumar and that he is no longer associated with M/s. Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd., and that the complainant has represented herself to be connected with the company "Consindia HR Services Pvt., Ltd.," or "CHR Global HR Services Pvt., Ltd.," and that she has been using the official email address of the company without due authorization and that the company is concerned with the activities of the complainant and her husband and further has warned the public not to 4 entertain them as the representatives of M/s.Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Consindia HR Services Pvt., Ltd., or CHR Global HR Services Pvt., Ltd., and that any one who would transact with them would be doing so at their own costs and consequences and that the companies would not bear any responsibility for their acts. (d) Complainant alleged that the said official email address was allotted to her officially and the same was configured by the company at its office in New Delhi. The email ID of the complainant was obtained through normal process and once the email ID was allotted to her, a welcome message was sent to her by the Head Office, congratulating her on becoming a part of the firm. When the name of the company changed, the details of the existing email IDs from the Bengaluru office including the then existing email ID of the complainant was also given to the Admin in-charge. In one of the communication emails received from the Vice-President of the firm, the same has been sent to the complainant's husband. The Cyber Crime Police attached to C.O.D., Bengaluru made enquiries and found that the email ID of the complainant was configured by M/s.Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd., and that the email ID of the complainant very much existed in the group. (e) She also alleged that the accused got the said defamatory advertisement published just to wreck vengeance on the complainant and her husband. It is wanton and mischievous act and it is false and per se defamatory. It is carried out with the sole object of tarnishing the professional, social and personal image of the complainant and her husband. The accused 5 No.1 being the Chairman and Managing Director and the accused Nos.2 and 3 being the Directors of M/s.Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd., are responsible for its day-today transactions and dealings with its business associates, employees, clientele and other activities. They are wholly responsible for the publication of the said defamatory advertisement which contains the false, baseless and per se defamatory allegations. Consequent to the publication, the complainant had received innumerable phone calls and enquiries with respect to the said advertisement doubting and questioning her antecedents, her honesty, integrity and uprightness. She and her family members have been put to untold mental agony, pubic shame, humiliation and disgrace. It has caused great harm to their reputation and standing in her activities in the social and religious fields. Therefore, the accused have committed offence punishable U/s.500 of IPC . Though legal notice was issued to the accused to tender an unconditional apology and to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,00,000/- within ten days, the accused have failed to comply the same. Therefore, she has filed the present complaint. 3. On the basis of the private complaint filed by the complainant under Section 200 of Cr.P.C, this Court recorded the sworn statement of the complainant and took cognizance of the offence punishable under section 500 of IPC. 4. On issuance of summons to the accused no.1 to 3, they appeared before this Court and got enlarged on bail. Case against A1 and 2 was split up on 30.09.2023. Accused no.3 is represented by the advocate of his choice. As 6 it is a summons trial, based on the complaint averments, plea was framed against the accused no.1 to 3 and read over to them and he did not plead guilty and claimed to be tried. 5. To prove the guilt of the accused, complainant got examined herself as PW-1 and got marked eleven documents as Ex.P1 to 11. One witness was examined as PW2, on behalf of the complainant. This Court recorded the statement of the accused no.3 under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. He denied the incriminating material against him and did not lead any defence evidence. However, they got marked three documents on their behalf as Ex.D1 to 3. 6. Heard the complainant and learned counsel for the accused. Synopsis filed on behalf of the complainant and written arguments was filed on behalf of accused no.3. Perused the records. 7. The points that arise for my consideration are as under:- 1. Whether the complainant proves beyond all reasonable doubt that, accused no.3 being the Director of M/s. AB Initio HR Solutions Pvt Ltd., along with accused no.1 and 2, got published a public notice containing scurrilous and defamatory imputation about the complainant and her husband in Times of India and Economic Times on 31.01.2006, out of malice, with an intention to harass or with the knowledge or having reason to believe that the above public notice would harm the reputation of the complainant and her husband and thereby accused has committed offence punishable under Section 500 of IPC? 2. What Order? 8. The above points are answered in the following manner; Point No.1 - Negative, 7 Point No.2 - As per final order, for the following; REASONS 9. POINT NO.1: It is the case of the complainant that she and her husband were associated with the accused and their organisation, M/s.Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd., and that they had given official email ID to the complainant. However, once the complainant and her husband disassociated themselves from the said firm, accused had published public notice in Times of India and Economic Times on 31-01-2006 alleging that the complainant has been using official email ID without due authorization and that the company is concerned of the activities of the complainant and her husband. Further, they also warned the public that the complainant and her husband are not the representatives of the accused organisation. As such it is alleged that accused defamed the complainant by publishing false and defamatory public notice. 10. The complainant in order to prove her case, got examined as PW.1 and deposed the same as her complaint averments in her chief examination. In her cross-examination she deposed that her husband was a consultant and not an employee with CHR Company. She denied that he was removed as a consultant from the Company on 25.01.2006. She identified the reply given by her husband marked as Ex.D1. She deposed that she does not know if Ex.D1 is the reply notice given to the notice of removing her husband from the position of the consultant. She admitted that the management of the company is in Bombay. She denied that as her husband used database of the company 8 to parallelly start his business, he was removed as an consultant. She identified the document regarding appointment of her husband which is marked as Ex.D2 and the termination letter which is marked as Ex.D3. She admitted that as per Ex.D3 the accused requested her husband not to represent the company in any future activities. 11. PW1 further deposed that, she was not employed by the accused. She deposed that the accused had created a corporate email ID in her name. There is no email sent to her directly from accused Nos.1 and 2 creating her corporate email ID. She also deposed that she has received mail from the administrator and also received a welcome mail. She admitted that when the email ID was created, her husband was associated with the accused company's Branch Office at Bengaluru. She denied that the email ID was created by her husband without the knowledge of accused Nos.1 and 2. She also denied that on account of unauthorized activities from her mail ID without authorization from the company, her husband was terminated by the accused. She admitted that, in Ex.P2 it has been mentioned that her husband has been terminated by the accused. Her husband did not issue any paper publication against Ex.P2. But they had complained to the Cyber Crimes Division. She denied that Ex.P2 was issued in a routine manner as public notice and it was not meant to defame her. Her husband has not filed any separate defamation case against the accused. She also deposed that all the three accused persons were looking after the affairs of the Company. She has 9 not produced any documents to show that accused No.3 was the Director of the Company or handling the affairs of the Company. Her husband joined the company as a consultant and not as a retainer. She deposed that she was never employed by the company but they had offered their franchise. She denied that there was a dispute between the company and her husband regarding the manner in which he managed the affairs of the company and for that reason the company relieved her husband. She also denied that she and her husband have illegally removed the data from the company and by making use of it, they are running a parallel company. She also denied that without the knowledge of the company, unauthorizedly her email ID was created. She also denied that she and her husband were making use of the company data illegally, and that the accused in good faith had issued the public notice to safe guard its interest. She admitted that the company has initiated criminal proceedings against her and her husband in Bombay and she does not know about the nature of the said proceedings. In a criminal case against them in Bengaluru, they had approached the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka. She denied that email printouts produced before the court by her are created. She denied all the other suggestions put-forth to her by the learned counsel for the accused. 12. Witness Jagdish Rao.S was examined as PW.2. In his chief- examination, he deposed that he is a qualified Company Secretary working as Senior Vice President at a private organization. He deposed that complainant's husband and himself were working together in a private company and as such 10 he knew their family also. The husband of the complainant is an IIM graduate and well known in the corporate circles. He and his wife are also involved in various charity works and is associated with many NGOs. Complainant also holds high esteem in the society. However after reading the publication in Times of India newspaper on 31.01.2006, where it was published that the complainant and her husband had configured email address without authorization, he changed his mind about the complainant and her husband. In spite of the said publication, he held them in high esteem but the publication do raises doubt in his mind about their honesty and integrity. 13. PW2 in his cross-examination deposed that he was not summoned by the court to give the evidence. He admitted that the complainant asked him to depose before this court. When the complainant approached him, she informed him the nature of the case and the evidence that he needs to depose before the court. He also admitted that he had come along with the complainant to give the evidence. He deposed that he has not produced any bill before the court to show that his company subscribed to newspaper dtd. 31.01.2006. He further deposed that his corporate friend informed about the publication in the Times of India newspaper. He did not subscribe to Times of India newspaper. He did not see the said article and it was told to him by his friend. He did not see the appointment order appointing complainant by the accused Nos.1 and 2's company. He was also not aware of the fact that the husband of the complainant was removed from the company. He admitted that if any employee commits fraud or mischief in the company, it is common 11 practice in the corporate world to issue such advertisements. He became aware of the fact through newspaper that the complainant was removed from the company for creating a separate email account. He admitted that since the complainant and her husband had involved themselves in activities against the company, the said advertisements was issued. He denied that he is deposing falsely before the court at the instance of the complainant. 14. Complainant relied upon the decisions of our Hon'ble Apex Court in Chaman Lal v. State of Punjab , (1970) 1 SCC 590, Harbhajan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1966 SC 97 and Rajesh Churiwala v. State of UP and another, 2021 SCC OnLine All 501. 15. On the other hand, accused did not lead any evidence. 16. The degree of proof that is required in a criminal case, when it is for the prosecution/complainant to prove the case against the accused, she has to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt. Where the accused person/s is called upon to prove that his/their case falls under an Exception, law treats the onus as discharged if the accused person/s succeeds in proving preponderance of probability. [ T.N. Lakshmaiah v. State of Karnataka , (2002) 1 SCC 219 and Ganesh Narayan Hegde v. S. Bangarappa, ILR 1999 KAR 3480.] 17. There arises two questions for the discussion in this case. First- Whether the said publication is defamatory in nature? And Second- Whether the accused no.3 is liable for the said publication? I shall answer both the questions one after the other. 12 Question No.1: Whether the public notices published in Times of India and Economic Times dated 31.01.2006 is defamatory in nature? 18. Section 499 IPC defines the offence of defamation. It contains 10 exceptions and 4 explanations. The relevant portion reads; " Section 499 . Defamation.-- Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person." 19. Therefore, if the accused are the persons who either made or published the defamatory imputation, they would be liable for punishment under Section 500 IPC. In order to constitute an offence under section 499 of IPC, the complainant needs to prove that, 1) an imputation was made consisting of words spoken or written or intended to be read or made by signs or by visible representations; 2) the imputation concerned the complainant; 3) accused made or published incriminating imputation; and 4) that intention behind the making or publishing the imputation caused harm to the reputation of such person. 20. Therefore, to constitute an offence of defamation under Section 499 , there has to be imputation and it must have been made in the manner as provided in the provision with the intention of causing harm or having reason 13 to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the person about whom it is made. Whether the content of the Ex.P1 and Ex.P2 public notices are defamatory or not, or whether it was published at the instance of the accused, or whether the complainant's reputation was demeaned in the estimation by others or not, are questions of facts to be determined in this case. 21. In this case, complainant submitted that, she was defamed by the accused no.1 to 3, who are the Directors and Managing Directors of M/s Ab Inititio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd now M/s Consindia HR Services Ltd or CHR Global HR Services Pvt., Ltd., by publishing a public notice in Times of India and Economic Times Newspaper on 31.01.2006. On perusal of the two public notices published at page no.21 of Times of India and page no.3 of Economic Times marked as Ex.P2 and Ex.P3, both the public notices are same and it reads as: "This is to inform the general public that Mr. A.J. Ishwar Kumar residing at No.21 Income Tax Layout, Sadananda Nagar, Bangalore - 560 0338 (Tel. Nos.25241334/25240373, Mob:98866 45522) has been terminated as Head - South of Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd, ("the Company") vide letter dated 25 January 2006 and is no longer associated with the Company. We understand that the wife of Mr. A.J. Ishwar Kumar, one Mrs. Sundari Ishwar also residing at the address above has represented herself to be connected with the Company, Consindia HR Services Pvt. Ltd. or CHR Global (HR Services) Pvt. Ltd. We understand that she has been using the official email address of the Company without due authorization. The Company is seriously concerned with the activities of Mr. A.J. Ishwar Kumar and Mrs. Sundari 14 Ishwar and advise the public not to entertain Mr. A.J. Ishwar Kumar and Mrs. Sundari Ishwar as representing Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd, Consindia HR Services Pvt. Ltd. or CHR Global (HR Services) Pvt. Ltd. If any member of the pubic transacts with either Mr.A.J. Ishwar Kumar or Mrs.Sundari Ishwar as representing Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd, Consindia HR Services Pvt. Ltd. or CHR Global (HR Services) Pvt. Ltd., they shall be doing so at their own costs and consequences and the undersigned or Consindia HR Services Pvt. Ltd. or CHR Global (HR Services) Pvt. Ltd., will not bear any responsibility in respect thereof". Sd/- Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd, A CHR Enterprises, 507, B & C 5th Floor, Kakad Chambers, 132- Dr.Annie Besant Road, Worli, Mumbai - 400 018." 22. Therefore, what is stated in the said public notice is that 1) the complainant has represented herself to be connected with the company, Consindia HR Services Ltd or CHR Global HR Services Pvt., Ltd., and 2) that she is using the official email address of the company without due authoriation and 3) that the company is concerned with the activities of AJ Ishwar Kumar and his wife, i.e. the complainant. 23. There is no dispute that Sri. AJ Ishwar Kumar, husband of the complainant was working with M/s. Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt Ltd., and joined the company in June 2005 as per Ex.D2, letter of Intent. In the said Ex.D2, worded as offer letter, it is mentioned that he shall be getting retainer fees and that he shall be reporting to accused no.3, the Managing Director of the Company. It is also not in dispute that Sri. AJ Ishwar Kumar was 15 terminated from service as per Ex.D3 letter. The said letter was addressed by accused no.1 to the husband of the complainant on 25.01.2006 stating that his services were terminated with immediate effect as he committed various offences causing huge loss to the company. Thereafter the impugned public notices were published as per Ex.P2 and Ex.P3 on 31.01.2006. 24. Complainant submitted that, when her husband joined the organization of the accused, she was also asked to help their organization and that she would be compensated for her work and accordingly gave her the email ID, 'sundariishwar@abinitiopeople.com' and later, it was changed to 'sundariishwar@chrglobal.co.in' with the change in the name of the company. As per the public notices, complainant was using the email ID unauthorizedly. However, complainant has produced Ex.P4, excerpt of an email correspondence dated 16.10.2015 received between the email ids 'anjana@abinitiopeople.com' and 'sundariishwar@abinitiopeople.com' where Ms. Anasuya congratulated the complainant on becoming part of M/s. Ab Initio HR Solutions Pvt. Ltd and complainant stated that she learnt a lot from Ms. Anjana when she was in Bangalore and also asked for her inputs and both of them exchanged pleasantries in the said email correspondence. Therefore, Ex.P4 clearly shows that the company knew that the complainant was allotted with an official emial ID and the same was being used by her. 25. Complainant also produced Ex.P5 email correspondence dated 5.12.2005 where Mr. Hemant Ojha had requested Ms. Anusuya of the said Company to give him the list of emails whose names had to be inserted in to 16 the new domain, '@chrglobal.co.in' list. Accordingly, Ms.Anusuya replied to the said email at 1.33 pm as per Ex.P6, giving the list of existing email IDs attached to the domain '@abinitiopeople.com', so that the same may be included in the new domain '@chrglobal.co.in'. Further, as per Ex.P7, on 5.12.2005, Hemant Obja sent an email to Anasuya and Ishwar Kumar at 6.25 pm mentioning the new email IDs, which also included 'sundariishwar@chrglobal.co.on'. Complainant also produced Ex.P8 email excerpt sent by Assistant Vice President, Rajib Sarkar, saying goodbye to his company, which was also marked to the complainant at her email ID, 'sundariishwar@chrglobal.co.in'. 26. Accused contended that no email was sent to her directly from the accused persons creating her corporate email ID. It is also argued that when the email ID was created, complainant's husband was associated with the accused company's Branch Office at Bengaluru and it is under his instructions the email ID was created, without the knowledge of the accused. It is also argued that on account of unauthorized activities from her mail ID without authorization from the company, her husband was terminated by the accused. However, accused has not produced any document to show that due to the activities in the email account of the complainant, her husband, AJ Ishwar Kumar was terminated from service. 27. Complainant in fact submitted that, they had given a complaint to the Cyber Crime Police Station and the Cyber Crime Police got the information from Net4 India that the email ID of the complainant was created by the 17 company itself. She produced Ex.P9, letter of Net4 India addressed to Cyber Crime Police Station on 09.03.2006 mentioning the details of the domain and that the domain, @abinitiopeople.com belonged to Consindia HR Services Pvt. Ltd and the Admin's and Tech's email ID was muditranjan@consindiaglobal.com and the same was operated from Vasant Vihar in Delhi. Based on the said report of Net4 India, Cyber Crime Police issued a letter on 22.03.2006 that the email ID of the complainant was configured officially and allotted to the complainant. Therefore, accused cannot argue that the email ID was created at the instance of her husband since the email ID was created by the Admin in Delhi and thereafter, the same is acknowledged by the employees of the Company. Hence, in this background, on perusal of the Ex.P2 and Ex.P3 public notice issued by M/s. Ab initio HR Solutions Pvt Ltd, Mumbai, the same amounts to defamatation. 28. As per section 499 of IPC, except in the nine circumstances mentioned as exceptions, whoever makes or publishes any imputations concerning any person intending to harm the reputation, he is said to defame that person. The Apex Court in the decision of M.C. Vaerghese v. T.J. Ponnan and another , AIR 1970 SC 1876, observed that the exceptions to section 499 must be regarded as exhaustive as to the cases which they purport to cover and recourse cannot be had to add new grounds to the exceptions, beyond the statute. 29. Accused took up a specific defence that what is published in Ex.P2 18 and Ex.P3 is the truth and the same was published for the public good as a public warning. It is undoubtedly true that the first Exception exempts from criminal liability, statements which are true and which are required for public good. The first exception to section 499 of IPC which reads as follows: "First Exception.--Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published: It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact." 30. A bare reading of the first exception reveals that section 499 of IPC contemplates truth as a defense and to operate as a valid defense in a criminal case for defamation. Exceptions one postulates that if the imputation is true, it is not defamation. Because to import anything which is true concerning any person and for the public good, it is not defamation to the person against whom such imputation is made or published. However, it is for the accused who has published or made the imputation, to prove the same to be true, without which he is not an entitled to the benefit of first exception. 31. The Apex Court in Chaman Lal v. The State of Punjab , 1970 Cri LJ 1266, observed that, in order to come within the First exception to section 499 of the IPC, it has to be established that what has been imputed concerning accused is true and the publication of the imputation is for the public good. The onus of proving these two ingredients, namely, truth of the imputation and the publication of the imputation for the public good is on the complainant. 19 32. Accused no.3 submitted that what was published was the truth and for the public good. However from the perusal of Ex.P4 to Ex.P7 email correspondences and the Ex.P8 report, it cannot be true that the email ID, sundariishwar@abinitiopeople.com or sundariishwar@chrglobal.co.in was created unauthorizedly and that the company was not aware that the complainant was using the said email IDs. Accused no.3 has not produced any document to show that how the email ID was being misused by the complainant or her husband. Therefore, accused no.3 has failed to justify that what was published as per Ex.P2 and Ex.P3, is the truth and the same is published in good faith. 33. Therefore, complainant proves that an imputation published in Times of India and Economic Times dated 31.01.2006 by the M/s.Ab Intitio HR Solutions Ltd., was with an intention and knowledge that such imputation would cause harm to the reputation of the complainant. Question No.2: Whether the accused no.3 is responsible and liable for the said publication? 34. From the above discussion, what is proved by the complainant is that the company, M/s. Ab Intitio HR Solutions Ltd., having its office at Worli, Mumbai got the said public notices published. However, the said company has not been arraigned as an accused in this case. Therefore, the complaint without making the company, M/s.Ab Intitio HR Solutions Pvt Ltd., a party is not even maintainable as there can be no vicarious liability in IPC offences. 35. Further, accused no.3 is said to be the Managing Director of M/s. 20 Ab Intitio HR Solutions Pvt, to whom, complainant's husband, AJ Ishwar Kumar reported to. Ex.D2 document marked from the accused's side shows that accused no.3 was the Managing Director of the said company at the time when the husband of the complainant joined the organization. Thereafter, no document is produced to show if accused no.3 was still the Managing Director of the organization even on 25.01.2006, when complainant's husband was terminated from service. Moreover, on perusal of Ex.D1 and Ex.D3, the correspondence is with the accused no.1 and there is nothing on record to show that accused no.3 was responsible for the said publications. 36. The Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka in a similar case in Rajeev Chandrasekhar v. K. Koteswar Rao, Crl . Pet.No.101127/2015 dated 17.02.2022, took note of the Apex Court decisions and observed that: "The petitioner could not have been roped in for having committed the offence under Sections 499 and 500 of the IPC. 12. As held by the Apex Court, the principle of vicarious liability is not applicable to criminal offences in the absence of any provision laid down in the statute. The statute applicable in the case at hand is the Act or the IPC . The Managing Director thus cannot be held to be vicariously liable for the acts committed by the Company or its employees merely because he happens to be the Managing Director of the TV news channel." 37. Therefore, when a complainant intends to rope in a Managing Director or any officer of a company, it is essential to make requisite allegation against him, since there is no concept of vicarious liability under IPC . In this 21 case, there is no evidence to show that accused no.3 was privy to the publication of public notices in the two newspapers or that he was directly responsible for the said publications. Further, the very complaint is also not maintainable as it has not arraigned the company, M/s. Ab Intitio HR Solutions Pvt Ltd., under whose name the said public notices were published. 38. Therefore, the burden of proof on the complainant being that of beyond reasonable doubt, she has failed to prove that the accused no.3 was responsible for the said publications. As such, she has failed to prove that accused no.3 defamed her. Accordingly, I answer Points No.1 in the Negative. 39. POINT NO.2: For the afore said reasons, the following order is passed; ORDER Acting u/S.255(1) of Cr.P.C. the accused No.3 is acquitted of the offences punishable u/S. 500 of IPC. Bail bond of accused and surety stands canceled. (Dictated to the Stenographer directly on computer, typed by him, same was corrected by me and then pronounced in open court on this the 22nd day of April 2024). (ANJALI SHARMA.V.S) X A.C.M.M., BENGALURU. 22 ANNEXURE LIST OF WITNESSES EXAMINED COMPLAINANT PW.1 Sundari Eshwar PW.2 Jagadish Rao. S Exhibits Marked Ex.P1 Annual Report of Association of pupil disability Ex.P2 Public notice in "Times of India" Ex.P3 Public notice in Economic times Ex.P4 Welcome Message Ex.P5 Email by Hemanth Ojha Ex.P6 Reply to E-mail Ex.P7 Confirmation Mail Ex.P8 Group Mail Ex.P9 Mail by Net 4 India Ex.P10 Acknowledgment given by Cyber Crime Ex.P11 Legal Notice Material Objects got marked NIL Defence NIL Exhibits Marked Ex.D1 Notice dt. 31-01-2006 Ex.D2 Letter of Intent Ex.D3 Letter Material Objects got marked NIL (ANJALI SHARMA.V.S) X ADDL.C.M.M., BENGALURU.