Vikas Sahni vs Anshika Mishra on 16 August, 2024 IN THE COURT OF MS. SHEETAL CHAUDHARY PRADHAN ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE-02 : SOUTH EAST DISTRICT SAKET COURT : NEW DELHI Criminal Revision No. 693/2023 PS H.N. Din U/Sec. 499/500 IPC In the matter of :- Vikas Sahni S/o Sh. Narinder Kumar Sahni R/o F-8/9, Model Town-II New Delhi- 110009. .... Revisionist Versus Anshika Mishra D/o Sh. Satish Kumar Mishra R/o Village Khar Gurdaspur Post Office- Jajamau, Unnao- 209801 Uttar Pradesh. Also at :- 4, Valencia House, Custom House Square IFSC, Dublin 1, Republic of Ireland (M) 3553 89 974 1036 ......Respondent Date of Institution : 25.11.2023 Date of Arguments : 16.08.2024 Date of Order : 16.08.2024 Decision : Revision Petition Dismissed & Order of Ld. Trial Court is upheld. CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.1 of 23 ORDER 1. Revisionist namely Vikas Sahni has filed present revision petition thereby challenging impugned order dated 14.10.2023 passed by Ld. Trial Court in Criminal Complaint Case No. 512/2021 case titled "Vikas Sahni Vs Anshika Mishra", vide which, Ld. Trial Court had dismissed the complaint of revisionist herein and declined for summoning of the accused. 2. Briefly, it is stated by the revisionist in his complaint u/sec. 190 CrPC before Ld. Trial Court that the revisionist was working as a Director with Ashoka University and was a senior IT professional having experience of more than 35 years. Further, the complainant/ revisionist is man of reputation in the Academia and the Information & Communication Technology Industry both nationally and internationally. Further, he has been awarded with several academic awards. He has studied in University of Delhi and has also topped at prestigious colleges at various levels for several years. That the respondent was well aware about the aforesaid achievements of the complainant and the well built reputation of the complainant, as the respondent was close associates and friend of the complainant since the year 2016. Further, the revisionist / complainant met the respondent first time in the year 2016 at a seminar at ARSD college, where the complainant was invited as a Speaker and the respondent was a student. Over the years, the two became friends and during the same time, respondent being young and still studying, would often show her CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.2 of 23 incapacity to take care of her financial needs and the complainant helped the respondent by advancing amounts on the promise of repayment of money in the future. Upon the representation, the complainant advanced friendly loans to the respondent as per her needs, requirements and request for monetary help and assistance. However, the respondent failed to return the loans. Thereafter, whenever the complainant/ revisionist asked for repayment of money, respondent on various occasions through e-mails and otherwise issued threats of embroiling the complainant in false and frivolous legal cases and also threatened to implicate the complainant/ revisionist in false rape and sexual harassment cases. However, the complainant ignored the threats and persisted to demand for repayment of his money over the phone and through e-mails. Failing any response from the respondent regarding payments, complainant filed a civil suit bearing no. 268/2020 before the Rohini Courts and also filed a complaint with the police on 26.11.2020 regarding extension of threats by the respondent. On 16.02.2021 one Sh. Ketan Mehra, Advocate representing the respondent, wrote a defamatory e-mail to the complainant making false allegations and imputations. The derogatory, libelous, scandalous contents were sent in the e-mail which is already mentioned by Ld. Trial Court in the impugned order dated 14.10.2023 which is not repeated for the sake of brevity. It is also stated by the revisionist in his complaint that the aforesaid e-mail being false and frivolous cause harm to the reputation of the complainant/ revisionist. It is stated that the imputations in the e-mail resulted into lowering the reputation of the CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.3 of 23 complainant amongst his peers and therefore, was defamatory and the respondent is liable to be summoned for the offence punishable u/sec. 499/500 IPC . 3. Complainant examined himself as CW1 and his wife as CW2 to substantiate his allegations before Ld. Trial Court. He relied upon his employment agreement as Ex.CW1/1, e-mail dated 16.02.2021 from Advocate Mr. Ketan Mehra as Ex.CW1/2 and the e-mail sent on behalf of the complainant through his Advocate as Ex.CW1/3 alongwith certificate u/sec. 65B of Indian Evidence Act and police complaint dated 26.11.2020 as Ex.CW1/4 and civil suit no. 268/2020 as Mark A. 4. Revisionist has taken following grounds challenging the impugned order :- 1. That impugned judgment has been passed without considering documents and evidence on record and is not in accordance with law. 2. That the impugned judgment is against the settled cannons of criminal jurisprudence. 3. That the complaint, document and evidence make out a prima facie summoning of the respondent, were not considered by Ld. Trial Court. 4. That the allegations and imputations in the e-mail sent by advocate on his office mail are per-se is defamatory. These imputations are false and are not protected by any of exception contained in Section 499 of the IPC. CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.4 of 23 5. That Ld. Trial Court has committed a grave error in law by wrongly holding that the said communication of the respondent shall be a privileged communication. That Section 126 Indian Evidence covers only the private and confidential communication between the client and the lawyer which cannot be disclosed either by means of direct question or elicited by means of indirect tactics. No communication made to further any illegal purpose is protected. In the present case, the advocate has communicated the allegations or the communication, if any, he had with the respondent. 6. Because the e-mail to the petitioner is from Ketan Mehra, Mehra and Associates, Advocates and Solicitors which is his office e- mail and these false imputation is thus published in Ketan Mehra office also which have seen by his colleagues in the office. 7. That Ld. Trial Court did not appreciate the testimony of the wife of the petitioner who has clearly deposed that the reputation of the petitioner has been lowered down and the allegations are false and incorrect. Therefore, holding that the petitioner has failed to prima facie establish the publication to his friends and family is contrary to the record. 8. That there was a direct threat to the petitioner by the respondent which is an offence under Section 506 of the IPC for which he filed a complaint also with the Police Station, Model Town, New Delhi. 9. That impugned judgment suffers from illegality and perversity is liable to be set aside. 5. Respondent in the present matter was summoned and was duly served, however, respondent failed to appear despite several opportunities. CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.5 of 23 6. I have heard Ld. Counsel for the revisionist/ complainant and carefully considered the record and gone through the submissions. 7. The law pertaining to the offence u/sec. 500 IPC is discussed by the higher courts in catena of judgments and the same is observed below. In the case of " Bhaskar Raj Saxena Vs. Sudershan Ausekhar & Ors " MANU/AP/0808/2000 passed by Hon'ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh para 11 wherein it has been held that ; "11. Obviously, the civil and other proceedings have been pending between the complainant and the accused. In all those proceedings, the genuineness or otherwise of the will has been the contentious issue; in as much as the petitioner- accused has consistently been stating that his father never executed such a will and the will dated 3-10-1976 is a forged document. The main grievance of the complainant appears to be that the accused petitioner has the audacity of coming to his house and uttered those words particularly when two persons were present before him one of whom was a news paper agent. It is no matter whether such utterance has been made against the complainant at his house in the presence of two or more persons or in writing in any proceeding initiated by the complainant in various fora or elsewhere, if such utterance has been made in good faith and in his own interest. There is no gainsaying that the petitioner has been contending that his father never executed such a will in favour of the complainant before the Civil Court CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.6 of 23 and before various authorities before whom the proceedings are pending. Obviously the said stance is in his own interest and in the interest of the public good since Endowment Department also claims the said property. Therefore, viewed in this perspective and backdrop it is difficult to discern the necessary malice or ill will on the part of the petitioner in having uttered those words which in view of the complainant are in insinuating nature. It is apposite here to consider the judgment of the Judicial Commissioner's court in BAIJA v. BABU, 45 INDIAN CASES 833 held as follows: "A statement made by a party to a suit in good faith and for the protection of his interest and which is relevant to the matter in issue falls under exception 9 of Sec.499 I.P.C. and is privileged and in order to take such statement out of the exception express malice must be proved." 12. Nowhere in the complaint it has been averred that the petitioner uttered those words out of spite and malice with intention to defame the complainant. Even otherwise the facts set out supra would take away in my considered view the necessary malice. The learned counsel for the petitioner further seeks to place reliance upon the judgment of the Madras High court in SANKAMMA V. GOVINDA CHETTY , AIR 1925 MADRAS 246 According to the facts in that case , a lawyer's notice was got sent by a widow of deceased Hindu to the accused charging him with the offence of criminal breach of trust and theft of the property of her husband and threatening CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.7 of 23 further with civil and criminal proceedings. In reply thereto, through his counsel the accused stated inter alia that she was living adulterous life and that she was discarded owing to her such conduct by her husband and that her daughter was not the daughter of her husband and that she had never lived with the deceased for about 25 years. When a criminal prosecution was launched alleging defamation it was held by the Madras High court that the accused being directly interested in making those allegations and the terms employed were not too violent for the occasion or disproportionate to the facts, no offence of defamation was made out. The learned counsel further relied upon a decision of the Supreme court in RAJENDRA KUMAR PANDE V. Uttam & Another , . That was a case where a complaint was filed for defamation alleging inter alia that the accused persons made a complaint to the Treasury Officer Amaravathi containing false imputations that the complainant had come to office in a drunken state and abused the Treasury Officer, Additional Treasury Officer and the Collector in the filthy language and such imputations had been made with an intention to cause damage to the reputation of the complainant and thereby committed a criminal offence punishable under Sec.500read with Sec.34 of I.P.C. When the process was issued after taking the complaint on file, the accused filed a petition to quash the proceedings. The Apex Court held, that taking on its face value that it would be squarely covered by exception 8 of Sec.499 of CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.8 of 23 I.P.C . and therefore no case of defamation could be made out. 13. The imputation must be made intending to harm the reputation of the person against whom it was made or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation would harm the reputation of the person aimed at if it was made that would be an offence of defamation except under the exceptions incorporated under the section. As discussed supra, exception 9 of Sec.499 of I.P.C. is germane very much for consideration in the present set of facts. The petitioner has been making the utterances, which in view of the complainant is an imputation not for the first time at his house but on several occasions elsewhere including in judicial proceedings. That is very much necessary in the point of view of the accused in his interest to defend him in the suit and to protect the property and also in the interest of public. Therefore, in my considered view, the gravamen of the accusation said to have been made against the petitioner is squarely covered by exception 9 under Sec.499 of I.P.C. The offence under Sec.500 of I.P.C. is therefore not attracted. In view of the pendency of various civil proceedings between the parties inter se it is nothing but an abuse of the process of the court to initiate criminal proceedings against the petitioner." CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.9 of 23 8. Further in case titled " Malancha Mohinta Vs. Dipak Mohinte " 2022 SCC Online Cal 518:- "20. Learned advocate for the petitioner has strongly asserted that whatever representation was made by the petitioner in her letter, they would not be covered by the defination of the offence of defamation laid down in section 499 of the Indian Penal Code as they have been excepted under the 5th, 8th and 9th exceptions. It appears from the 5th exception that any representation would not amount to a defamation if any opinion is expressed on the merit of any case civil or criminal in good faith which has been decided by court of justice in respect of the conduct of a person. In the instant case on the basis of the material available in the Case Diary the bail of the opposite party was rejected by the court. Therefore, subsequent acquittal of the opposite party cannot undo his arrest and his released on bail by the court, therefore such representation when made in the letter would be covered by the 5th exception of section 499 of IPC. 21. Furthermore, preferring an accusation against any person to any of the persons who have lawful authority over that person, would not amount to defamation. In the instant case the petitioner wife made accusation against the opposite party before his superior in office in good faith and consistent to her accusation made in the petition of complaint. Therefore, the same would not amount to any defamation as the same is excepted in the 8th exception. It is an all pervasive fact that any CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.10 of 23 imputation of representation made by person in good faith for protecting his own interest would not amount to a defamation. The 9th exception of section 499 of IPC ultimately lays emphasis upon statement made in good faith. Therefore, the ingredients of offence of defamation are not attracted by the contents of the letter as they are within the ambit of the exceptions laid down under section 499 of IPC. 22. The other contention of the petitioner is that if the impugned letter constituted any offence under section 500 of IPC. the same is barred by limitation as the date of offence should be construed from the date of issuing the letter, that is on 24.05.1997. In my considered view the provision under section 469 (1)(a) of the Code of Criminal Procedure lays down that the period of limitation for taking cognizance in an offence under section 500 of IPC is three years from the date of its initiation. The argument on behalf of the petitioner therefore appears to be forfeited by the decision in the case of Surinder Mohan Vikal Vs. Ascharaj Lal Chopra ; 1978 Supreme Court Cases (Cri) 215, wherein it has been held that in a case under section 500 IPC the period of three years' limitation would be calculated with reference to the date for purposes of the bar provided by section 468 of Cr. P.C, when the complaint was filed much after the expiry of that period, it was not permissible for the court of the Magistrate to take cognizance of the offence after expiry of the period of limitation. In the case of Naresh Chand Jain Vs. State of U.P and others ; CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.11 of 23 1991 Cri.L.J. 1888 (All), it was further held that the starting point of limitation for filing a complaint for defamation is the date of publication and within three years thereof.The aforesaid decisions on the point of computation of period of limitation along with the decision of a learned Single Bench of this Court in Rabindra Nath Pal Vs. Ratikanta Paul & others (CRR No. 563 of 2015), the question of limitation for filing a case for the offence of defamation has been put to rest, where it has been laid down that the same should be filed within three years from the date of publication. Accordingly, the complaint filed under section 200 Cr. P.C by the opposite party on 08.06.2009 alleging the offence of defamation committed by his wife by her letter dated 24.05.1997 is barred by the law of limitation under section 468 of Cr. P.C. 23. It is worthwhile to refer to the decision relied on behalf of the opposite party in the case of Vanka Radhamonohari. In the said case the fact situations disclose that the same was relating to a matrimonial offence under section 498A and 494 of IPC which are continuing offences under section 473 of Cr. P.C. therefore, the period of limitation for such offences are not the same as the period of limitation for taking cognizance of the alleged offence under section 500 of IPC. The ratio of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court , laid down in the case of Vanka Radhamohonari Vanka Venkata Reddy and others; (1993) 3 SCC 4 is distinguishable from the present case and the same period of limitation is CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.12 of 23 not found applicable to the instant case. 24. On the basis of the foregoing discussion I hold that the impugned proceeding in Case No. AC 968 of 2009, now pending before learned Judicial Magistrate 9th Court, Alipore is barred by limitation and therefore continuance of such proceeding which is not legally tenable is an abuse of the process of court. Therefore, in exercise of the power vested in this court under section 482 of Cr. P.C and for achieving the ends of justice, I find and hold that the complaint lodged by the opposite party giving rise to Case No. AC-968 of 2009 and the cognizance taken thereof by the Magistrate is bad in law. As such impugned proceeding and all orders passed in the case are quashed. 25. The revisional application is allowed on contest. Interim order if any stands vacated. All related applications in this case are disposed of. Let a copy of the judgment be sent to learned Judicial Magistrate, 9th Court at Alipore, South 24 Parganas for information." 9. Further in the case of " Iveco Magirus Brandschutztechnik GMBH Vs. Nirmal Kishore Bhartiya & Anr. " 2023 SCC Online SC 1258. "44. Thus, when a Magistrate taking cognisance of an offence proceeds under section 200 based on a prima facie satisfaction that a criminal offence is made out, he is required to satisfy himself by looking into the allegations levelled in the complaint, the statements made by the complainant in support of the complaint, the CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.13 of 23 documentary evidence in support of the allegations, if any, produced by him as well as statements of any witness the complainant may choose to produce to stand by the allegations in the complaint. Although we are not concerned with section 202 here, if an inquiry or an investigation is conducted thereunder, it goes without saying that the reports should also be looked into by the Magistrate before issuing process under section 204 . However, there can be no gainsaying that at the stage the Magistrate decides to pass an order summoning the accused, examination of the nature referred to aboveought not to be intended for forming an opinion as to whether the materials are sufficient for a 'conviction'; instead, he is required to form an opinion whether the materials are sufficient for 'proceeding' as the title of the relevant chapter would indicate. Since the accused does not enter the arena at that stage, question of the accused raising a defence to thwart issuance of process does not arise. Nonetheless, the fact that the accused is not before the Magistrate does not mean that the Magistrate need not apply his judicial mind. Nothing in the applicable law prevents the Magistrate from applying his judicial mind to other provisions of law and to ascertain whether, prima facie, an "offence", as defined in section 2(n) of the Cr. PC is made out. Without such opinion being formed, question of "proceeding" as in section 204 does not arise. What the law imposes on the Magistrate as a requirement is that he is bound to consider only CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.14 of 23 such of the materials that are brought before him in terms of sections 200 and 202 as well as any applicable provision of a statute, and what is imposed as a restriction by law on him is that he is precluded from considering any material not brought on the record in a manner permitted by the legal process. As a logical corollary to the above proposition, what follows is that the Magistrate while deciding whether to issue process is entitled to form a view looking into the materials before him. If, however, such materials themselves disclose a complete defence under any of the Exceptions, nothing prevents the Magistrate upon application of judicial mind to accord the benefit of such Exception to prevent a frivolous complaint from triggering an unnecessary trial. Since initiation of prosecution is a serious matter, we are minded to say that it would be the duty of the Magistrate to prevent false and frivolous complaints eating up precious judicial time. If the complaint warrants dismissal, the Magistrate is statutorily mandated to record his brief reasons. On the contrary, if from such materials a prima facie satisfaction is reached upon application of judicial mind of an "offence" having been committed and there being sufficient ground for proceeding, the Magistrate is under no other fetter from issuing process. Upon a prima facie case being made out and even though much can be said on both sides, the Magistrate would have no option but to commit an accused for trial, as held in Chandra Deo Singh (supra). The requirement of recording reasons at the stage of issuing process is CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.15 of 23 not the statutory mandate; therefore, the Magistrate is not required to record reasons for issuing process. This is also the law declared by this Court in Jagdish Ram v. State of Rajasthan25 . Since it is not the statutory mandate that reasons should be recorded in support of formation of opinion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding whereas dismissal of a complaint has to be backed by brief reasons, the degree of satisfaction invariably must vary in both situations. While in the former it is a prima facie satisfaction based on probability of complicity, the latter would require a higher degree of satisfaction in that the Magistrate has to express his final and conclusive view of the complaint(2004) 4 SCC 432 warranting dismissal because of absence of sufficient ground for proceeding." 10. Respondent had not been summoned by the Ld. Trial Court vide impugned order dated 14.10.2023 and refused to summon the accused for offences punishable U/s 500 of the IPC . To understand the offence of defamation, it is reproduced below. As per Section 499 IPC, Defamation means ; "Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm,the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.16 of 23 person. Explanation 1.--It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the fellings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.--It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.--An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.--No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a lothsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. First Exception.--Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published.--It is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact. Second Exception.--Public conduct of public servants.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.17 of 23 of a public servant in the discharge of his public functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Third Exception.--Conduct of any person touching any public question.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any person touching any public question, and respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Fourth Exception.--Publication of reports of proceedings of courts.--It is not defamation to publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such proceedings. Explanation.--A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an enquiry in open Court preliminary to a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of the above section. Fifth Exception.--Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others concerned.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. Sixth Exception.--Merits of public performance. --It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.18 of 23 the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his character appears in such performance, and no further. Explanation.--A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public. Seventh Exception.--Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful authority over another.--It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by law or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates. Eighth Exception.--Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person.--It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation. Ninth Exception.--Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's interests. --It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good. Tenth Exception.--Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good.--It is not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another, provided that such caution be intended for the good of the CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.19 of 23 person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person in whom that person is interested, or for the public good". 11. Section 500 IPC Punishment for Defamation states "whoever defames another shall be punishable simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both". 12.In the present matter, impugned order was dated 14.10.2023 and this revision petition was filed on 25.11.2023. Therefore, this petition is filed within limitation period. Impugned order was not interlocutory order and therefore, this petition is maintainable legally. 13. Section 499 IPC brings under the criminal law, the person who publishes as well as the person who makes the defamatory imputation. In essence in order to constitute the offence of defamation it must be communicated to a third person because what is intended by the imputation is to arouse hostility to others. Therefore, the words must be defamatory and they must refer to aggrieve party and also that they intention was malafide. The section is having four explanation and ten exceptions, which have been mentioned above and therefore, the same is read to be entirety including the explanation and exceptions. Therefore, the exceptions mentioned are integral part of defamation. The explanations largely amplify the scope of the section and the exceptions take out certain things out of the application of the offence. Therefore, the intention of the maker should be with the knowledge and the intention that such imputation shall harm the reputation CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.20 of 23 of such person. Therefore, any imputation made without intention or knowledge or having reason to believe that it would harm the reputation of such person will not constitute an offence of defamation. Right of reputation is the facet of right to life of a citizen under Article 21 of the Constitution. It is extremely delicate and cherished value of any person. Therefore, reputation can also be defined as good name, credit, owner or character which is derived from public opinion. Therefore, in essence the offence of defamation consists in its tendency to cause that description of pain which is felt by a person who knows that he is exposed to the public at large by a feeling of hatred or disregard. Therefore, the intention to cause harm is the most essential sine qua non for an offence U/s 499 IPC . Therefore, it is the offence which requires a certain men rea. Further, the intention has always to be gathered from the circumstances of each case. Further, merely because the trial court had come to the conclusion that no offence was made out and the accused was acquitted by the trial court does not indicate that the intention of the complainant was malafide. 14. During pre-summoning evidence, revisionist examined himself as CW1, and his wife as CW2. Both the aforesaid witnesses examined by the revisionist deposed that due to aforesaid e-mail, received by CW1 which contained false and fabricated imputations on the complainant and the same resulted, into lowering of image of the complainant/ revisionist and therefore, the respondent through the aforesaid e-mail has committed the offence punishable u/sec. 499/ 500 IPC . CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.21 of 23 15. However, it is evident that aforesaid witnesses were the relatives/ being the wife of the revisionist and were closed to him but have not stated anywhere that due to the aforesaid e-mail which was not even communicated to any of his friends or relatives or acquaintances by the respondent which could show that it caused lowering of image of the complainant in society at large. Further, that the aforesaid e-mail against the revisionist, the reputation or the image of the revisionist was lowered in their eyes. The Ld. Trial Court while passing order on summoning has categorically observed the aforesaid facts and have also considered the testimony of all the witnesses examined by the revisionist before it and upon perusal of the testimony of aforesaid witnesses prima facie no case was made out and thus did not summon the respondent for the offences punishable Section 500 IPC. To my mind, the respondent herein falls under 'exception 9' provided U/s 499 IPC . Exception 9 of Section 499 IPC clearly indicates that it is not defamation if the imputation is made in good faith by a person for protection of his or his others interest and also falls under 'exception 10' wherein any caution intended for good of a person to whom conveyed or for public good. In the present matter, the respondent may have communicated the aforesaid e-mail through her lawyer to the complainant in good faith and had infact nowhere published or alleged the same in public. The e-mail was a personal communication between the lawyer of the respondent and the complainant and did not amount to publication or imputation which was communicated to public at large. CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.22 of 23 16. The revisionist Vikas Sahni had failed to substantiate the ingredients of section 499 IPC by leading any cogent evidence by which it could be imputed that the respondent herein had the intention to defame revisionist or that revisionist was actually defamed or his reputation was tarnished. Infact, the witness i.e. his wife has casually stated in her statement that the aforesaid e-mail received by her husband had false allegations and has vaguely stated that it harmed the reputation of the complainant in the society and among his friends, family and police, CW2 nowhere stated the name of any person, family friend or acquaintance among whom the reputation of the complainant/ revisionist was lowered. Infact, she herself has stated that her husband had not committed any wrong and the cases filed by the respondent were false in nature. Therefore, in the present facts and circumstances, no offence of defamation is made out, and therefore, the impugned order dated 14.10.2023 is hereby upheld. 17. This revision petition stands dismissed. File be consigned to Record Room after due compliance. Digitally signed Announced In The SHEETAL by SHEETAL CHAUDHARY Open Court Today CHAUDHARY Date: 2024.08.16 14:09:55 +0530 [Sheetal Chaudhary Pradhan] ASJ-02, South-East/Saket/Delhi 16.08.2024 CR No. 693/2023 Vikas Sahni Vs. Anshika Mishra Page No.23 of 23