Kewal Krishan Jindal vs Mohd. Mustafa And Another on 17 December, 2012 Author: M.M.S. Bedi Bench: M.M.S. Bedi CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [1] IN THE HIGH COURT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA AT CHANDIGARH. CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) Date of Decision: December 17, 2012 Kewal Krishan Jindal .....Petitioner Vs. Mohd. Mustafa and another .....Respondents CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.M.S. BEDI. -.- Present:- Mr. A.K. Kalsey, Advocate for the petitioner. Mr. Dinesh Goyal, Advocate for the respondents. -.- M.M.S. BEDI, J. (ORAL) The petitioner through instant petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has sought the quashing of the order dated October 27, 2007 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Sangrur, setting aside the summoning order dated June 6, 2005 passed by Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Malerkotla in complaint No.38 of October 31, 2002 titled as Kewal Krishan CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [2] Jindal Vs. Mohd. Mustafa and another under Sections 500, 500-A, 500-B, 506 read with Section 120-B IPC. The short question which is required to be determined in the present petition is whether there is sufficient preliminary evidence produced on the record before the trial Magistrate warranting the summoning of the respondents under Sections 500 and 506 IPC. The petitioner filed a complaint annexure P-1. The complainant- petitioner had averred in the complaint that he had been Vice President of Punjab State Rice Mill Association since 1985 and held the post of President of Malerkotla Rice Mills Association besides holding various offices including the office of Vice President of Municipal Council, Malerkotla. The complainant was supporter of Ajit Singh Chanduraian who had a close contest with respondent No.2 Razia Sultana in Punjab Assembly Elections. The complainant attended and addressed election rallies of Ajit Singh Chanduraian and donated money for his election fund for which reason respondents No.1 and 2 were inimical towards him and they did not like complainant supporting their rival candidate. Complainant had been receiving blank calls threatening him to remain aloof from the election campaign or he would face dire consequences. The complainant alleged in the complaint that respondent No.2 committed irregularities in the elections for the post of President of Municipal Council, Malerkotla to which the complainant objected and walked out of the meeting. Musclemen of respondents had attacked the complainant regarding which an FIR had CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [3] been lodged at Police Station Malerkotla. A Malerkotla Band was observed on August 27, 2002. Following news item was published in the Tribune Chandigarh dated August 30, 2002:- "MALERKOTLA COUNCILLORS ALLEGE POLICE EXCESSES TRIBUNE NEWS SERVICE CHANDIGARH, AUGUST 29 The happenings in the Malerkotla in Municipal Committee meeting on August 26 found an echo here today when seven councilors narrated the sequence of events and "indicted" Congress MLA Razia Sultan and her DIG husband (Ludhiana Police Range) M.Mustafa for creating an atmosphere of "fear psychosis" in the town there. Prompted by the BJP State President, Mr. Brij Lal Rinwa and the General Secretary (Organization) Mr. Avinash Jaiswal, the councilors gave a graphic account of the alleged irregularities committed in the election of the committee President at the behest of the husband-wife team (Razia-Mustafa) through their "henchmen" how the officiating Presiding Mr. Krishan Kumar Jindal was beaten up in public view and stripped naked by cops in plain clothes, how one Faqir Mohammad was elected President in place of Mr. Jindal and how 13 councilors opposed to Razia were neither heard nor their point of view recorded in the minutes. All this, they alleged took place in the presence and with the connivance of District Administration, as the SDM, Mr. P.K. Sabharwal, was present. CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [4] Later, a BJP delegation, including the councilors, submitted a memorandum to the Governor, highlighting the "high-handedness" of the Congress in Malerkotla. The memorandum briefly narrates the incidents, including the "murderous attack" on Mr. Jindal and demanded a CBI inquiry into the happenings, as they said "We have no faith in District Administration". The memorandum is signed by Mr. Rinwa, Mr. Jaiswal, seven councilors, besides the president of Sanatan Dharam Sabha, Mr.Kamlesh Kumar Garg, and the President, SAD (Urban Unit) Mr. Satnam Singh Sodhi. Mr. Rinwa who took up the cudgels o f t h e c o u n c i l o r s , s a i d a m i n i emergency (the kind in 1975) had been imposed in the State, where the police rules Supreme. The Chief Minister, he said, owed an explanation to the people on the "Police Raj" and excesses being committed on ordinary citizens and elected representatives "what has happened in Malerkotla is not an isolated or sole incident. Similar incident where the Police created fear and intimidated people, have earlier been reported from Patiala, Malout and Pathankot" he demanded action against those who had broken the law. On the other hand, both Razia and her husband Mustafa denied all allegations when contacted by TNS. Razia said she had today apprised the Chief Minister Capt. Amrinder Singh, of the happening. She said three days after an incident there was an attempt to politicise the issue. Replying to several questions and allegations by the Councilors and BJP leader against her, Razia said after the unfortunate incident in which Mr. Jindal was beaten up, he had met her. She asked him who were the persons CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [5] responsible so that action could be taken, but he feigned ignorance. She went on to say, "It now seems there is a conspiracy to defame me." Razia also disclosed that a video film of the proceedings of the Municipal Committee meeting that took place on August 26 is available. It shows there was neither any rigging of the election of the new President nor any Councilors signatures were forged, as alleged by the Councilors. A similar account was given to TNS by Mustafa on telephone. He listed several cases against Mr. Jindal, who is admitted to a hospital in Ludhiana, and stressed that even arrest warrants were pending in the court of the SDM against Mr. Jindal who was allegedly known as the Satta King. Giving more details, he said, "my wife promised to clean the place and that has irritated those whose 'shops' have been closed. I do not interfere in her work" he added. He scoffed at all charges and said the Councilors should first get their facts correct. He also alleged that there were corruption charges against Mr. Jindal that he had demanded money for the recruitment of some firemen. This had come to the notice of Razia, who stalled that selection. The Councilors demanded that SADBJP leaders should jointly come forward to take up the matter and visit Malerkotla, where a reign of terror had been let loose by the MLA and her husband." The portion highlighted above was alleged to be false, wrong, mischievous with an objective to defame the complainant. The petitioner examined himself as CW1 and produced the original newspaper Ex.P1 and his application Ex.P2. moved before SHO, Police Station, Malerkotla CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [6] besides producing Dev Raj Verma as CW2 supporting his version, CW3 Manpreet Singh, Advocate to prove that on August 27, 2002 a meeting was held by Bar Association, Malerkotla, to condemn the attack on the complainant as per resolution mark E. ASI Sewa Singh was produced as CW4 to prove that he had recorded the statement of complainant at CMC, Ludhiana, on the basis of which an FIR No.272 dated August 28, 2002 Ex.CW4/A was registered under Sections 324 , 323 , 506 , 379 , 148 , 149 IPC . Saroj Kumari, Clerk was produced as CW5 to prove copy of the letter received from Local Body, Punjab, Chandigarh as Exs. CW5/A and CW5/B. CW 6 Ajit Singh and CW7 Jai Pal had supported the complainant. Saurav Malik, Senior Correspondent of the Tribune was produced as CW8 to prove original newspaper Ex.P-1. Sh.Karamjit Singh Sohi, Advocate appeared as CW9 to prove copy of the resolution CW9/A. Learned Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate formed an opinion that the accused had made statement against the complainant in the newspaper addressing him "Satta King" besides levelling other allegations against him as such reputation of the complainant had been lowered down by news item Ex.P.1. Aggrieved by the summoning order, the respondents preferred a revision petition challenging the legality and propriety of the summoning order dated June 6, 2005. The Revisional Court on re-appreciation of the evidence held that revision petition was maintainable against summoning order. The summoning order was set aside holding that the learned Magistrate had CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [7] failed to examine whether the news item had been got published by the accused- respondents and that the evidence regarding earlier incidents between the parties had no relevance so far as the defamation on the basis of news item was concerned wherein the petitioner had been stated to be known as "Satta King". The relevant portion of the judgment of revisional Court is as follows:- "The News Item has been published from The Tribune News Service, but who got published this News Item, there is no evidence, except just imagination that perhaps it was got published by one Rajinder Sharma, rather in his evidence which has been recorded in the absence of the accused/ revisionists, CW8 Sauharav Malik stated that there is no record of the News Item through which they could categorically state as to which Press Reporter got published the News Item. When nobody is owning which Press Reporter got published the News Item, then to say that it was got published by the accused/revisionists, cannot be believed unless some one from the News Paper comes to own or to say that they published the News Item at the instance of the accused/ revisionists, nor the News Paper Correspondent has been made a party, so that he could explained at whose behalf this News Item has been published and the inference is that there was no evidence before the learned Magistrate that the News Item has been got published by the accused/revisionists as the person examined from the News Paper itself has not stated as to who got the News Item published. Therefore, the summoning order passed by the learned Magistrate, being without any evidence, has to be set aside as the judicial pronouncements relied CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [8] upon by the learned counsel for the complainant/ respondent are not applicable to the facts of the present case. The question whether the Magistrate need not pass detailed order, is not before this Court. When the Magistrate passed the order, evidence should be on the file, which the learned Magistrate appears to have taken into consideration. But when the witness summoned from the News Paper is unable to tell as to, which Press Reporter got published the News Item, the basis of News Item itself has not been proved." On the basis of the above said finding, the complaint of the petitioner was dismissed. Learned Counsel for the petitioner Sh.A.K. Kalsey has vehemently contended that there is sufficient evidence available on record for summoning the respondents as accused under Sections 500 and 506 IPC and that the revisional Court had exceeded its jurisdiction in setting aside the summoning order. A prayer has been made for setting aside the order passed by the revisional Court and to direct the trial of the respondents under Sections 500 and 506 IPC. After hearing counsel for the petitioner as well as counsel for the respondents, the short question which is required to be determined in the present case is whether there is sufficient evidence available on the record to summon the respondents for trial under Sections 500 and 506 IPC. So far as the offence under Section 506 IPC is concerned, there is no specific day, date or time when the petitioner had been criminally intimidated by any of CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [9] the respondents. On the basis of vague allegations under Section 506 IPC, it is not prudent to summon and try the respondents. So far as the offence under Section 500 IPC is concerned, the grievance of the petitioner is that the respondents have got published a news item Ex.P1 wherein the complainant has been described as allegedly known as "Satta King" by the respondents in the news item. A perusal of the news item reproduced hereinabove indicates that in the first part of the news item the Tribune News Service had reported an incident of August 26 pertaining to meeting of Municipal Committee indicting the respondents for creating an atmosphere of fear and psychosis in the town. An incident, of petitioner, having been beaten and stripped naked by cops and henchmen of respondents, has been reported. The police has been attributed atrocities. The second part of the news item is pertaining to the comments alleged to have been given by respondent No.1 on telephone to Tribune News Service about listing several cases against the petitioner and it was alleged that the petitioner was allegedly known as "Satta King". With the assistance of counsel for the petitioner, I have gone through the statements of witnesses including that of Saurav Malik, correspondent of the Tribune who proved that the news item "Malerkotla Councillors allege police excesses" had been printed by Principal Correspondent Sh.Rajinder Sharma and that he was already dead. News item Ex.P1 was proved by him but the most material evidence to prove that CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [10] the news item alleging petitioner as "Satta King" was actually published at the instance of respondent No.1. The most important ingredient of Section 499 IPC is that there must be publication of the imputation and that the publication of the imputation must be to strangers or general public. Section 499 requires three essentials-- i) making or publishing any imputation concerning any person; ii) such imputation must have been made-- a) by words either spoken or intended to be read; or b) by signs; or c) by visible representations; iii) as such imputations must have been made with an intention to harm, or with knowledge or reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerning whom it is made. If one makes or dictates a libel and another writes, both are guilty of making it. It is also not disputed that if one repeats, another writes are liable and a third person approves what is written they can of course be said to be makers of publication and could be held to be doing an unlawful act. In the present case, the allegation of the petitioner is that the defamatory material was published on the communication by respondent No.1 to the correspondent or the publisher. The defamatory statement was CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [11] allegedly transmitted to the correspondent through a telephone but the said fact could not be established. No presumption lies on reporting that it is based upon an authenticated communication unless and until some material is produced on the record. No presumption of truth is attached under law to a news item unless and until the source and communication of the newspaper is established. Unfortunate for the petitioner, the correspondent Mr.Rajinder Sharma had died as such the receipt of telephonic communication by him from respondent No.1 could not be established. The petitioner, though has not mentioned in his complaint that there is no criminal case of gambling registered against him but he has produced on record Ex.P2 on which report of SHO, Malerkotla has been endorsed indicating that (i) FIR No.123 dated June 29, 1986 under Section 7 of the Essential Commodities Act, Police Station Malerkotla (ii) FIR No. 17 dated March 4, 1993 under Sections 353 , 186 , 506 , 323 , 148 , 149 IPC, Police Station Malerkotla, (iii) FIR No. 37 dated March 8, 1998 under Section 406 IPC, Police Station Malerkotla and (iv) FIR No. 123 dated April 24, 2001 under Sections 353 , 186 , 506 , 34 IPC, Police Station, Malerkotla had been registered in which cancellation report had been submitted in case FIR No. FIR No.123 dated June 29, 1986 and FIR No. 123 dated April 24, 2001 but petitioner was under trial in cases FIR No. FIR No. 17 dated March 4, 1993 and FIR No. 37 dated March 8, 1998 under Section 406 IPC, therefore, reporting in the news item that petitioner was involved in criminal cases is even established from the evidence on the record and the reporting to that CRM M-7088 of 2009 (O&M) [12] effect is not defamatory as imputation which is true concerning a person will not constitute an offence. So far as the allegations regarding "Satta King" is concerned, the word allegedly known as "Satta King" is not a definite imputation. Be that as it may, the complaint and summoning order deserved to be quashed on the ground that the complainant has failed to establish that publication was on the communication of respondent No.1 or that it is respondent No.1 who actually made imputations. The Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Malerkotla had summoned the respondents on the ground that the respondents had made statement against complainant by calling him "Satta King" and also levelled false allegations against him but the revisional Court has set aside the order of summoning on the ground that the basis of the news item i.e. the communication by respondent No.1 to the correspondent had not been established. No fault can be found in the order of learned Additional Sessions Judge, Sangrur dated August 27, 2007. The revision petition is, thus, dismissed. December 17 , 2012 (M.M.S.BEDI) sanjay JUDGE