Subhash Vasudev vs Sunil Vasudev on 12 November, 2014 Page No. 1/15 IN THE COURT OF MS. SUJATA KOHLI:ADDITIONAL DISTRICT JUDGE: WEST DISTRICT:TIS HAZARI COURTS:DELHI RCA No. 11914/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV S/o LATE RAMASRA VASUDEV R/o E-79, (1st FLOOR), KIRTI NAGAR, NEW DELHI-15. .......APPELLANT VERSUS SUNIL VASUDEV S/o LATE RAMASRA R/o TEMPLE LANE, KALIBARI, P.O. LUMDING, DISTRICT-NAGAON, ASSAM, PIN-782447. ......RESPONDENT DATE OF FILING OF THE APPEAL : 30.05.2011 DATE OF RESERVATION OF ORDER : 31.10.2014 DATE OF DECISION/ORDER : 12.11.2014 ORDER: - Suit of the plaintiff/appellant herein has been dismissed. Plaintiff had sought damages for defamation alleged to have been committed by way of some letters alleged to have been written by the defendant against him. Plaintiff and defendant are real brothers. RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 2/15 2 Ld. Trial court had dismissed the suit mainly on the issue no.2 i.e. as to whether the defendant has defamed the plaintiff or not. The document which has been claimed to contain defamatory matter, itself has remained unproved in accordance with the relevant provisions of Indian Evidence Act and the provisions of the Bankers Book Evidence Act . 3 Plaintiff had alleged that the letter was written by the defendant to the bank containing the defamatory material against the plaintiff. The defendant in his WS had admitted that he had written the said letter but he denied that it contained any defamatory material against the plaintiff. 4 Even though factum of writing and sending the letter to the bank, stood already admitted in the WS, the plaintiff still set out to prove the said letter by examining a witness Mr. S.S. Rotela, an Officer from the bank as PW3. 5 The said witness sought to prove the letter dated 27.04.1998, but it was objected to by ld. Counsel for the defendant regarding mode of proof and the objection had been kept reserved for final stage of the suit. 6 It was argued on behalf of the plaintiff that the photocopy of the bank record bearing a bank stamp could be read in evidence as per provisions of Bankers Book Evidence Act and therefore, the document stood duly proved. RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 3/15 7 However, after a detailed reference to the relevant provisions of Bankers Book Evidence Act i.e. Section 4 and Section 2(3) of the Act, Ld. Trial court has come to the conclusion that the said letter has not been proved in accordance with law. Section 2(3) mainly defines the term "bankers book" to include ledgers/day books, cash books, account books and all other books used in the ordinary business of the bank and thus, the letter in question in the present case was clearly not falling in any of the above said categories and as such, the contention that the same could be read in evidence was held to be not tenable. 8 Furthermore, even assuming for a moment for the sake of arguments, that the letter does fall under the said category of bankers books, still, the provision of Section 2(8)(A) of the said Act further provides the manner of certification required to make a copy admissible in evidence which is quite specific in as much as it lays down in as much as it is to be in the form of a certificate to be written at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy of such entry, that such entry is contained in one of the original books of the bank and was made in usual and ordinary course of business, and that said book is still in the custody of the bank, such certificate being dated and subscribed by the Principal Accountant or Manager of the bank with his name and official title, alone and not otherwise, whereas in the present case the stamp on the copy of the letter Ex. RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 4/15 PW-3/A was not as per the provision of the Act and for this reason also, it was held inadmissible in the evidence, and remained unproved. 9 Furthermore, not only this, but PW-3 has also admitted during cross- examination that he himself has never seen the letter in the official record, nor he had compared the copy (Ex. PW-3/A) with the original. He even submitted that he has no knowledge about the said letter and all that he saw of it was the certified copy handed over to him by Senior Manager of the branch. For this reason as well, PW-3 was not even competent to prove the said letter, copy of which was Ex. PW-3/A. 10 Furthermore, the document in question was not even a public document in as much as it had not been made by a public servant in discharge of his official duty, but was only a letter supposed to have been written by a customer to the bank official, and as such, it could not be argued that certified copy thereof was admissible at par with certified copies of public documents as was contended by Ld. Counsel for the plaintiff/appellant herein. 11 Since the letter remained unproved and defendant is stated to have denied the contents of the said letter, Ld. Trial Court has been of the view that plaintiff has not been able to prove that defendant has defamed him and accordingly his suit was dismissed. RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 5/15 12 However, it is here in the latter part that Ld. Trial Court seems to have gone wrong on this aspect in as much as it is not that defendant had anywhere in his WS denied either having written the letter in question or even its contents. All that the defendant took as a defence was that the contents of the letter were not defamatory and that they had been written in good faith and to protect the interest of the defendant in his business. 13 Thus, it was clearly a case where the document and its contents had already stood admitted to have been written to the bank and as such, the admitted fact did not even need to be proved any further. Order 8 Rule 5 CPC provides that a fact admitted in the pleadings, needs no further proof. As such, whether the letter was admissible or not admissible in accordance with Indian Evidence Act , would not even have come into play at all, in view of the fact that the defendant himself had already admitted having written it to the bank, with all its contents. 14 At this stage, it is no doubt necessary to reproduce the relevant contents of the WS to highlight the admission of the defendant, as under:- "5. The defendant never wrote any letter regarding the plaintiff and his family in bad taste as is mentioned in this para by the plaintiff and has never expressed in the society or friends RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 6/15 anything which goes against the respect and reputation of the plaintiff and his family and whatever the defendant has written or said that was purely in good faith in representing and protecting his business interest of which the plaintiff and defendant are co-sharers. Therefore, all whatever the defendant has written or said is not within the ambit of the provisions of defamation....." "6. the defendant had/has never any intention to make any imputation against the plaintiff whatever the defendant has said or written to the Punjab National Bank, Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi, of which the plaintiff himself is fully responsible and the plaintiff himself had created the said situation...." "7. The defendant had not said or written anything in a bad taste. The defendant has written letters to the bank only to protect his interest as a prudent should have done in the business...." "8. Contents of para 8 of the plaint that the defendant wrote the letter in question to the Punjab National Bank, New Delhi are not denied and the contents of the said letter were not RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 7/15 defamatory or with a view to degrade the plaintiff and his wife. The contents of the said letter were in good faith and to protect the interest of the defendant in his business...." "That the defendant having come to know about his illegal motive of the plaintiff, requested the Manager, PNB, Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi, not to release the payment to the plaintiff and his wife without the consent of the defendant who is a joint account holder of RD Account No. 1777, vide his letter dated 22.07.97." "14. The defendant had never uttered any word which had ruined the reputation of his elder brother i.e. plaintiff and his wife i.e. Bhabhi of the defendant. The defendant has always given and is giving all respect which they deserve as elders. The defendant has placed the facts before the officers of the Punjab National Bank and nothing more." 15 The totality of these extracts clearly show only that, all that the defendant has taken by way of a defence, was justification about the contents of the letter and no more. He has neither denied writing the letter nor its contents, all that he has tried to do, is to explain his intention and motive for having written the said letter which according RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 8/15 to him was not to defame the plaintiff or his wife. 16 As such, the document in question already stood proved, and the only question left before Ld. Trial Court, was as to whether the contents could be treated to be defamatory or not in nature. 17 Ld. Counsel for respondent has argued that according to Halsbury, Fourth Edition, Volume 28, Para 10, Page-7:- "A defamatory statement is a statement which tends to lower a person in the estimation of right thinking members of society generally or to cause him to be shunned or avoided or to expose him to hatred, content or ridicule, or to convey and imputation on him disparaging or injurious to him in his office, profession, calling, trade or business." 18 According, to R.F. Heuston, Salmond on Law of Torts, 138, (17th Edition, 1977) - "The wrong of defamation consist in publication of a false and defamatory statement concerning another person without lawful jurisdiction." 19 Ld. Counsel for respondent has further argued that in the present case there is neither any publication of any imputation concerning the appellant by the respondent nor there was any intention to cause harm or knowledge or having reason to believe that the imputation will harm the reputation of the appellant. In the instant case the letter RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 9/15 dated was addressed to Branch Manager of Punjab National Bank whereby the concern has been raised by the respondent with respect to the conduct of the appellant and requesting them to treat the joint account as disputed and not to deal with the said account which will prejudice the interest of the respondent herein. 20 Further that the letter has not been circulated by the respondent generally to the public. Further, the appellant has even failed to prove that the said letter has been distributed/circulated generally to public by the Branch Manager, Punjab National Bank and there is not an iota of reference in the pleadings or evidence led by the appellant that the said letter was circulated among the general public. 21 Further that a complete reading of alleged letter dated 27.04.1998 shows that the same was addressed to Branch Manager, Punjab National Bank, New Delhi, who was having a lawful authority over the joint account held by respondent, appellant and his wife. It was further stated in the said letter that the said account shall be treated as disputed alongwith other accounts maintained with the Punjab National Bank. It was further averred in the said letter that the appellant has thrown out the respondent of the partnership business and as well as the personal properties of the respondent. 22 Further that the PW-1 Sh. Subhash Vasudev was cross-examined on 31.05.2005 whereby it has been admitted by him that he is living in the house of the respondent and the greater portion of the said house is in his possession. He has stated RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 10/15 that various disputes are pending out of family settlement between him and the respondent. It was also admitted by him that they were carrying on business under the name and style M/s Woodworth. He further admitted that on he had few gaps in his practice and was enrolled till 1998-99 in Assam and subsequently, got his enrollment transfer to Bar Council of Delhi. He admitted that the joint account was maintained with Punjab National Bank, Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi, and there were disputes between the appellant and the respondent. That the cross-examination of PW-1 shows that the averments made in the said letter dated 27.04.1998 is true in all aspects with respect the conduct of the appellant towards the respondent. 23 Ld. Counsel for respondent also relied upon on the case titled as P. Sharma Dr. Vs. P.S. Popli , 2002 (1) Crimes 783 at Page 786, wherein it was held that "thus, accusation made in good faith to those who have lawful authority over the person so accused is protected by the exception". 24 It has been held in Daru Singh Vs. State of Gujrat, 2006 CrLJ, 720 (GUJ) "The report of the Postman about the conduct of the complainant on the basis of his experience on vesting on him to deliver the letter, in the opinion of the High Court, is covered in the ninth exception to Section 499. The accused appears to have made the observation in good faith for the protection of his own interest. He was required to make a report as to why the letter was not delivered to the addressee else he would have RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 11/15 invited action for not discharging his duty. As such, in the act of revisionist is covered under ninth exception of Section 499 of Indian Penal Code, 1860." 25 Citations given on behalf of the appellant :- 1. Sunilakhya Chowdhary Vs. H.M. Jadwet & Anr. AIR 1968 CALCUTTA 266 (V 55 C 50). 2. M.C. Verghese, Appellant Vs. T.J. Ponnan & Anr. , AIR 1970 SUPREME COURT 1876 (V 57 C 400). 3. Thiru John V. Subramhamanyan Vs. Thr Returning Officer & Ors. AIR 1977 SUPREME COURT 1724. 26 The legal proposition laid down therein not being even disputed by the Ld. Counsel for the respondent, the legal position is quite well settled, but as already discussed above, the said letter in question, with all its contents, would not fall in the definition of defamation, but rather, it would be falling within the exceptions viii & ix of Section 499 IPC. 27 At this stage, the letter in question i.e. Ex. PW-3/A, is required to be considered, and it is also necessary to mention herein the actual dispute between two brothers, which was revolving around the rent paid by their tenant to the plaintiff, RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 12/15 defendant and the wife of the defendant, and into their common account, and which, however, was alleged to have been usurped by the plaintiff alone as against the earlier alleged arrangement, and it was to protect his own interest that the defendant wrote the letter in question, to the bank. 28 By this letter Ex. PW-1/3, the defendant had mainly requested the Punjab National Bank to either transfer the deposit account to their branch at Lumding or in the alternative to accept the request of the defendant to treat the account as a disputed account and not to make any payment/transfer/loan to any one of them (The exact words being "one of us"), and which request, was said to be not affecting any prejudicing the interest of any one of the said joint account holders. The relevant lines in the letter, to which, the plaintiff has taken objection, are, at this stage, being marked 'A to A' in Red on the second page thereof. 29 Going by the totality of the tone and tenor of this letter, it can certainly not be said that the intention on the part of the defendant was at all to defame his brother or his wife, and on the contrary, it has clearly arisen in order to protect and safe-guard his own interest, as rightly claimed by the defendant. 30 The first exception U/S 499 IPC , which provides the definition of the offence of defamation, lays down clearly that, it is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 13/15 should be made or publish. Whether or not it is for the public good, is again a question of fact. 31 Similarly, the third exception provides that it is not a defamation to express in good faith, any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any person, touching any public question and respecting his character so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. "Eight Exception:- Accusation preferred in good faith to authorized person - It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority lover that person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation." "Ninth Exception:- Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's interests - It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interest of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the public good." 32 Further, it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of " Bilal Ahmed Kalu Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh " (1997) 7 SUPREME TODAY 127 that a maker of imputation without publication is not liable to be punish under that RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 14/15 Section. 33 As such, going by all the above para-meters, the above contents of the letter Ex. PW-3/A, cannot be held to fall within the category of defamation. 34 The Trial Court in so far as it has rejected the letter from the evidence certainly cannot be held to be correct to the extent that the suit has been disposed off on this ground alone, that the letter remained unproved. It was a clearly misconceived view of law and was in ignorance of the admission of the fact of writing of the letter and of its contents in the WS filed by the defendant. 35 Even otherwise, beyond the admissibility and mode of proof of the said document, Ld. Trial Court has not touched the aspect of the effect of the contents of Ex. PW-3/A. 36 The impugned judgment given on a wrong reasoning has to be set-aside. However, in spite of that, even after taking the letter Ex. PW-3/A as proved, with all its contents, the result of the suit, would still remain the same, in as much as, the contents are found to be not defamatory. As such, the appeal has been dismissed, though, on different reasoning, the result being same that the suit still stands dismissed. Fresh Decree Sheet be prepared. No Order as to costs. RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV Page No. 15/15 TCR be returned alongwith copy of the detailed Order. Appeal file be consigned to Record Room. ANNOUNCED IN THE OEPN COURT (SUJATA KOHLI) TODAY i.e. ON 12th NOVEMBER , 2014 Additional District Judge (West) THC/Delhi:12.11.2014 RCA No. 119/14/11 SUBHASH VASUDEV Vs SUNIL VASUDEV