Gulab Singh Mehra vs State on 3 May, 2018 IN THE COURT OF ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE (CENTRAL): DELHI CA NO.9/16 CIS No.54729/2016 CNR No.DLCT01­000149­2016 Gulab Singh Mehra S/o Sh. Chiranji Lal, R/o 25423, Hira Hagar, Gurgaon, Haryana. ......Appellant Versus 1. State 2. Ms. P., (Name concealed) Addl. Public Prosecutor, Prosecution Branch, GNCT of Delhi, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi. ......Respondents Date of Institution : 22.02.2016 Date of conclusion of Final Arguments : 06.04.2018 Date of Judgment : 03.05.2018 JUDGEMENT This is the first criminal appeal directed against the judgment of conviction U/s 509 & 294 IPC dated 25.01.2016 by Sh. Babru Bhan, Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate and also against order of sentence dated 28.01.2016, whereby the appellant has been sentenced to Simple Imprisonment for one month for the offence U/s 294 IPC and Simple Imprisonment for 3 months for the offence U/s 509 IPC and compensation of Rs.20,000/­ to the complainant for both the offences. Further in default of payment of compensation, the appellant was CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 1 directed to be sentenced for Simple Imprisonment for one month. In case FIR No.279/2002 PS Subzi Mandi in case No. 02401R6098902004. Trial Court Record has been summoned and notice of appeal was given to State. Prosecution case is that FIR in this case has been registered against appellant on 18.10.2002 U/s 394/ 509 IPC on a complaint of Ms. P, an Additional Public Prosecutor, Govt. of NCT of Delhi dated 17.05.2002 addressed to Lt. Governor, Govt. of NCT of Delhi. The entire complaint (Ex.PWP/A) is reproduced as under :­ "To, The Lt. Governor, Govt. of NCT of Delhi, Delhi. Subject :­ Complaint against Sh. G.S. Mehra, Chief Prosecutor, PFA Deptt., the then Public Prosecutor, Delhi for registration of FIR U/s 294/509 IPC against him. Sir, It is submitted that I am working as an Addl. Public Prosecutor/Administrative Incharge under the Directorate of Prosecution, Tis Hazari, Govt. of NCT of Delhi. I had made a complaint dated 22.02.2001 of indecent behaviour and misconduct against Sh. G.S. Mehra, the then P.P. Delhi, to the Home Department as well as to the Delhi Women Commission. the inquiry was conducted and on its recommendations of Woman Commission, the departmental action has been initiated against Sh. G.S. Mehra, under the provisions of C.C.S conduct Rules 3C, Sec (23) & (25) 1964 for his misconduct/using of vulgar/abusive/indecent behaviour towards the complainant. Sexually colourful remarks, abuses, being passed by making obscene sounds and gestures, non verbal conduct of sexual nature with intend to insult the modesty of the complainant. Now the penal action is warranted against Sh. G.S. Mehra. On 22.02.2001, I was assigned the work of preparation of material for the speech of Hon'ble L.G. Delhi or behalf of Prosecution Department, as requisitioned by the Home Department. I as instructed by the Director of Prosecution to collect the information from the office of Public Prosecutor, Delhi and respective Chief Prosecutors in respect of disposal of bail applications, opinion matters and scrutiny of chargesheet. Since the matter was of urgent nature as informed by the Home Department and material was to be submitted the same day latest CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 2 by 5.00 p.m., I instructed the staff to get the information/ statement on telephone from the office of the Chief Prosecutors Karkardooma and Patiala House Court complex as well as the Reader of P.P., Delhi, and other Chief prosecutors of Tis Hazari Court complex. They were requested to send the requisite information urgently. A written request was also handed over to the Readers of Chief Prosecutors at Tis Hazari Court and Reader to P.P., Delhi. In pursuance of said letter all the Readers of Chief Prosecutors sent the information immediately. The Reader of P.P., Delhi sent the report at 4.40 p.m. Sh. G.S. Mehra, P.P., Delhi, at about 3.30 p.m. came in the office of Sh.R.K. Jain, Additional P.P./ DDO and called me through peon in presence of Sh. R.K. Jain and other staff members of the Personal Branch, he rudely misbehaved with me and wiped out the letter which was taken by his Reader Head Const. Dharam Singh vide which the information related to his office was called. He immediately pounced upon me and asked as to who are you to send such letter? Your are not my officer (within the hearing of staff). He abused in filthy language which is not in good taste to describe by lady officer and said (vo bhainchood, ullu ka patha kaheenka) I will set him right. Sh. Mehra crossed all the limits of decency and used such indecent language towards me which can cause annoyance, humiliation and insult. I asked him not to use such language to a lady officer and you should use decent language and behave in a proper manner. It is also not good to use such language for your superior officer too. Despite this he became more furious and uttered that he would use more harsh and filthy language. Mr. Mehra used vulgur, abusive, intemperate language and also threatened me that he will also forward the letter to DCP/North District in continuation of his earlier complaint U/s 3 of SC/ST Acts for taking action against me too. I could not bear humiliation to that extent and came out of the room. The act of Sh. G.S. Mehra is unbecoming of a senior officer and amounts to gross misconduct and also non­cooperative attitude. It is also mentioned here that at many times Sh. Mehra tried to humiliate by passing uncalled remarks towards me earlier which were ignored. It is humiliation, mental agony and harassment as within the hearing of my colleagues and subordinates I have been badly snubbed and scolded by him like anything and that too when I was just doing the assigned urgent work. Mr. Mehra being the member of Schedule Caste made complaint against the Director of Prosecution for registration of case under the provisions of SC/ STs Act . The inquiry was conducted by the DCP/North District and Home Department Govt. of NCT of Delhi and same was found false/frivolous and baseless. He tried to black mail me to work as per his desires. He threatened to involve/implicate me with false complaint if I do not work as per his wish. As you know he seriousness of the provisions of Act and I worked under pressure. We have all the regards and respect for their caste and never showed disrespect for him and bound by the constitution of India. It is, therefore, requested that legal action and a case U/s 509/294 IPC may be registered against Sh. G.S. Mehra, Chief CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 3 Prosecutor, P.F.A. Department as the obscene act done by him towards me was entended to insult my modesty within public view and hence, penal action is warranted. Encl.: Yours faithfully, 1. Copy of Compt. dt.22.2.2001. 2. Order of commission for women ­­­­­­­ (Name of Ms. P.) dated 08.11.2001 Addl.Public Prosecutor, 3. Copy of order of Home Deptt. Directorate of Prosecution Govt. of NCT of Delhi Tis Hazari Courts, Phone ­(O) 3986893 (Res.) 7474499, 7479944 Copy for necessary action please:­ 1. The Chair Person, National Commission for Woman, New Delhi. 2. The Dy. Commissioner of Police, North Distt., Delhi. 3. Incharge Police Post, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi." On registration of FIR, the case was investigated by Inspector Sanjay (PW13). After completion of the investigation, chargesheet was filed. Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate took cognizance of the offence, summoned the accused and framed a charge U/s 509/294 IPC . The appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Prosecution examined in all 13 prosecution witnesses. PW1 ASI Krishan Chander recorded FIR Ex.PW1/A. PW5 SI Harish Chander, who was posted as Incharge at police station on 18.10.2002 wrote his endorsement Ex.PW5/A on the complaint and on the basis of the said complaint FIR was registered. PW9 Sh.G.L. Meena, Joint Secretary (Home), Govt. of NCT conveyed the grant of sanction for prosecution of the appellant by Lt. Governor of Delhi vide his letter Ex.PW9/A. PW11 Meena Kumari, the Record Keeper of Delhi Commission for Women, New Delhi, brought the summoned record of letter dated 08.11.2001. Copy of which was exhibited as Ex.PW7/D. This complaint is the complaint of Smt. Purnima Gupta. PW13 is the Investigating Officer. CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 4 PW2 Manoj Kumar is the Peon in the office of Directorate of Prosecution. PW3 Ct. Yogesh was posted at the relevant time at Reader's Branch in prosecution department. PW6 ASI Som Dutt was posted as ASI in the Directorate of Prosecution on the date of incident. PW7 Ms. P. is the complainant herself. PW8 Sh. R.K. Jain was Additional P.P. in the office of Directorate of Prosecution. PW10 HC Rambir Singh and PW12 Ct. Sunil Kumar were also present in the office of Directorate of Prosecution. All these witnesses are eye witnesses. Since PW7 is the victim, I reproduce her examination in chief as under :­ "I am working as Additional Public Prosecutor, in Directorate of Prosecution Govt. of NCT Delhi. On the day of the incident i.e. 22.02.01. I was working as Addl. P.P./ Administrative Incharge in the office of the Director of the Prosecution. On 22.02.01, I had made the complaint to the Principal Secretary Home through Director of Prosecution and on the next day to the Commission for Women against Sh. G.S. Mehra the then Public Prosecutor Delhi of his indecent behaviour and misconduct. After inquiry upon the recommendations of Commission for women the departmental action was initiated against Sh. G.S. Mehra for his misconduct, indecent behaviour and abuses (sexually colourful remarks) non verbal conduct, with the obscene gestures and act of sexual nature under provisions of Section 3 (C)/23/25 of the CCS Conduct Rule, 1964 and after this departmental action I had lodged the complaint with the HOn'ble LG and Police for the penal action. On 22.02.01, I was assigned by the Director of Prosecution, with the work to collect the material, for the preparation of the speech of Hon'ble LG as requisitioned by Home department. Since the matter was of urgent nature and the information was to be submitted latest by 5.00 p.m. on that very day. I instructed my staff to collect the information with respect to the bail matter, opinion matters and scrutiny of charge sheet from the offices of Chief Prosecutor at Karkardooma and Patiala House Court complex telephonically. A written request by me was also sent to the offices of the Chief Prosecutors at Tis Hazari courts and to the Officer Public Prosecutor Delhi in this regard. The information from all other offices was received immediately after the requisition was made but the information from the office of Public Prosecutor came only at the last minute at about 4.40 p.m. Before the information could reach, at about 3.30 p.m. on 22.02.01 Mr. G.S. Mehra, accused present in the court called me through Peon inthe officeof Sh. R.K. Jain (the then Addl. P.P./DDO) in presence of Sh. R.K. Jain and in the presence of staff CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 5 of the personal branch of the Director of Prosecution. He rudely misbehaved with me and wiped out the letter which was taken by his reader Dharam Singh by which information from his office was called from his pocket by making obscene gestures in presence of Sh. R.K. Jain and other staff member of the personal branch of the DOP. He immediately pounced upon me means sought of touching came over me and said who are you to send such letter and you are not my officer. He said "kahan hain who ulloo ka patha and behenchood" ( Mrs. Mehra was addressing Director of Prosecution), he said he will set him right. He abused me in filthy abusive language which caused me humiliation insult and annoyance. Mr. Mehra crossed all the limits of decency and abused me in such vulgar abuses which are not in the good taste to be described by a lady officer. I requested him to not to use such type of vulgar language and he should behave in a decent manner. Upon hearing this he became more furious and uttered that he willuse more harsh and filthy language and also threatened me to forward a complaint against me under the provisions of SC/ST Act to the DCP North in continuation to the complaint which he had already made against the Director of Prosecution. I could not b ear the Humiliation to the extent and came out of the room of Mr. R.K. Jain with a sobbing eyes. Many times earlier also Mr. Mehra tried to humiliate me by passing uncalled remarks by taking advantage of his position of being Public Prosecutor Delhi and my superior official. But earlier it was ignored. I felt great agony mentally, harassment, insult and humiliation at that time because of the conduct of Mr. Mehra and his indecent behaviour that to in presence of my colleague and subordinate staff. It was scolded and snubbed like anything by Mr. Mehra that to when I was doing just assigned work. the accused had made the complaint under SC and ST Act against the then Director of Prosecution to DCP North and to the Home Department which was inquired into and found to be false, baseless and frivolous. He tried to blackmail me and always threatened me to implicate me in the false case of SC/ST Act if I do not work as per his wishes or desires. Because of the pressure created by Mr. Mehra I always work under pressure and felt humiliated. I made the complaint addressed to the Hon'ble LG and to the police on 17.05.02 in which I requested the legal action against Mr. G.S. Mehra, my complaint is Ex.PW7/A bearing my signatures at point A. After inquiry the FIR was lodged on 18.10.02 and during the investigation IO visited my office and at my instance he prepared the site plan Ex.PW7/B bearing my signatures at point A and recorded my supplementary statement in which besides mentioning the fact of preparation of site plan I had also stated t hat Mr. Mehra was making obscene gestures and sound at the time of the incident, whereas the same is also mentioned in my complaint. On 12.02.03, I had handed over the copy of my complaint addressed to Principal Secretary Home, Ex.PW7/C and the copy of the recommendation of the Commission for Women, the same is Ex.PW7/D, Both the documents bearing my signatures at Point A, B & C. (Objected to by the Ld. defence counsel for the accused on the ground that the same is not available on record and only the copy of the same is available on CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 6 record and the same has not been produced by the IO). these documents were taken into possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW7/E and the seizure memo bears my signatures at point E. My statement was also recorded on 12.02.03." Date of the incident is 22.02.2001. The charge was framed against the appellant­convict U/s 509 I.P.C . alleging that on the date of incident at about 3.30 p.m. in the room no.159 of Sh. R.K. Jain, the then Sr. Prosecutor, Tis Hazari Courts, appellant had uttered the obscene words within the hearing of complainant with intention to outrage her modesty. Charge U/s 294 IPC was framed against appellant on the allegation that on the aforesaid date, time and place, appellant uttered obscene language in the aforesaid public place. Prosecution examined 13 witnesses to support the case including the complainant examined as PW7 and also other eye witnesses PW2 Manoj Kumar, PW3 Ct. Yogesh, PW6 ASI Somdutt, PW8 Sh. R.K. Jain, PW10 HC Rambir Singh and PW12 Ct. Sunil. Besides the complainant and eye witnesses as mentioned above, the prosecution examined PW1 ASI Kishan Chand, who recorded FIR, PW4 Ct. Mahender Nath, who is a witness to seizure of two documents from complainant vide seizure memo Ex.PW4/A prepared by IO, PW5 SI Harish Chand, the Incharge, police post Tis Hazari, PW9 Sh. G.L. Meena, Dy. Secretary (Home), who proved the sanction of prosecution by Lt. Governor of Delhi, which is Ex.PW9/A for accused being a public servant, PW11 Meena Kumari, Record Keeper and PW13 IO SI Sanjay. In statement U/s 313 Cr.P.C ., it was stated by appellant that he has been falsely implicated. He has denied the prosecution CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 7 allegations. It is stated that the prosecution witnesses in collusion with each other have falsely implicated him in this case from his lawful promotion as Director of Prosecution. It is further stated in his statement U/s 313 Cr.P.C . by the accused­appellant that prior to the incident he had moved one complaint U/s 3 of SC & ST Act against the then Director Sh. S.K. Dutta. According to him, no action on that complaint was taken by the police under the written order of the then Secretary (Home) Sh. R.K. Sharma. It is submitted that reason for falsely implicating him in this case is the complaint filed by him U/s 3 of SC & ST Act . Accused­appellant examined 5 witnesses in defence, details of which are as under :­ DW1 Honey Goel, APP, posted as OSD, Home Department, Govt. of NCT. DW2 Accused­appellant examined himself as DW2. DW3 Sh. R.L. Sharma, the then Dy. Secretary (Home). DW3 (DW4) Sh. G.S. Chaturvedi, Inquiry Officer in Department Inquiry conducted against accused­appellant regarding this incident. DW4 (DW5) Sh. Suman Lal, Steno attached to Sh. G.S. Chaturvedi, Inquiry Officer. Ld. Trial Court after appreciating found the appellant guilty and convicted him accordingly vide impugned judgment dated 25.01.2016 and sentenced him vide order dated 28.01.2016. Aggrieved by this judgment of conviction and sentence, the appellant is in appeal before this court. First of all, it is necessary to know the stand of the appellant, a public servant occupying a responsible post. For this purpose, I CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 8 reproduce his testimony U/s 315 Cr.P.C . as under :­ "I passed my LLB and started my legal profession as a lawyer at District Courts, Gurgaon in 1973. I joined Delhi Govt. as Asstt. Public Prosecutor in the year 1977. I was promoted as Sr. Public Prosecutor in 1985 and I was appointed as Addl. Public Prosecutor in the year 1987. I was promoted as Chief Public Prosecutor after due recommendation in the year 1995. I was appointed as Public Prosecutor, State of Delhi in the year 1996. I was having an office at room no.223, Tis Hazari Courts complex. In the year 1995, when I was a Chief Public Prosecutor, Delhi Govt. circulated a list of seniority with respect to the Chief Public Prosecutor of Delhi. Mr. S.K. Dutta was first in the seniority list followed by myself. As a Public Prosecutor, I was being paid additional salary of Rs.400/­ as per rules. My Predecessor Public Prosecutor. Sh. Maha Singh was an adhoc Chief Public Prosecutor and junior to me in the seniority list, however, he was appointed as Public Prosecutor before me. I made a representation to Ld. LG, Delhi regarding the appointment of Sh. Maha Singh as the Public Prosecutor and Sh. Maha Singh was removed as a Public Prosecutor and I was made the Public Prosecutor. One civil suit was already pending between Sh. Maha Singh and another colleague Sh. S.N. Srivastava about their inter­se seniority and I came to know about this case. I also moved an application before Hon'ble CAT for my impleadment as a party in that case and that application was allowed and I was made a party. My application was replied to on behalf of Delhi Government acting through Sh. G.L. Meena, Dy. Secretary (Home) who signed the reply. There was a mention in that reply in para no.3 regarding pendency of some complaints against me and reply is marked as Ex.DW2/A. On coming to know about pendency of some complaint against me, I demanded from the office of Directorate of Prosecution, Delhi a copy of such complaint through an RTI application. In response to RTI queries, it was informed through letter Ex.DW2/B that no such complaint is available in the office. I made an appeal before the competent Appellate Authority under RTI Act and furnishing of information was declined vide letter Ex.DW2/C (OSR) signed by Sh. A.K. Acharya. Against this order of the competent authority, I filed an appeal before the second Appellate Authority under RTI which was decided by order dated 24.07.02 Ex.DW2/D. My grievance was not redressed even by this order as necessary information was not furnished/ordered to be furnished and I was shown to approach Directorate of Vigilance. Sh. A.K. Acharya, before the order dated 24.07.02 transferred me from Prosecution Branch to PFA Department as Chief Public Prosecutor, thereby depriving me of the aforementioned additional salary of Rs.400/­. I came through my colleagues that one Poornima Gupta, Sr. Public Prosecutor, HQ, posted in the office of Sh. S.K. Dutta had filed a complaint against me. Smt. Poornima Gupta was holding a post in the Head quarter which never existed. When I was not provided with the necessary information, despite approaching the highest authority, I was compelled to file a criminal complaint case U/s 3 of SC ST Act and Section 500 IPC CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 9 against Sh. S.K. Dutta and Smt. Poornima Gupta which complaint is pending in this Court. One counter complaint against me was also filed by Ms. Poornima Gupta which is also pending in this Court. In her complaint, Ms. Poornima Gupta filed a document/complaint dated 13.12.01, the certified copy of which is Ex.DW2/E. This document bears endorsement at point X made by Sh. B.D. Goel, Sh. B.D. Goel was Chief Public Prosecutor on adhoc and was not having any authority to make a draft chargesheet vide the aforesaid endorsement. I had come to know that preparing the draft chargesheet and I demanded the copy thereof from Mr. B.D. Goel but he refused to give the same. Sh. B.D. Goel made an illegal demand of Rs.15,000/­ for providing the copy of chargesheet and in this regard, I made a complaint to Hon'ble LG of Delhi, Ex.DW2/F bearing my signatures at point A. As a matter of fact, no chargesheet was prepared by Sh. B.D. Goel was filed before any competent authority. A chargesheet against me was filed by Vigilance Departme3nt which is still pending inquiry. When I was made the Chief Prosecutor, I was youngest and junior most in the seniority list, however, I was given the benefit of the reservation being belonging to Scheduled Caste. This promotion as caused dissatisfaction in other colleagues and they were jealous. Some of my such colleagues used to disobey my directions for attending various Courts even in urgent matters. Sh. S.K. Dutta, In­charge of Directorate of Prosecution started harassing me on various pretext. My complaints regarding the insubordination of various Public Prosecutor under me were not paid any heed by Sh. Dutta. Ms. Poornima Gupta and Sh. R.K. Jain blantantly refused to work under my control as Addl. P.P. and they continued to work as Sr. Public Prosecutor in the Headquarter. I was compelled to file a complaint to DCP (North) against Sh. S.K. Dutta which complaint is Ex.DW2/G. I have been falsely implicated in the present case under a deep criminal conspiracy just to drag me from further promotion of the Post of Director of Prosecution, Delhi and I was second senior most officer in the Prosecution Branch. I moved a complaint against Sh. S.K. Dutta, the then Director of the Prosecution. the complaint is already Ex.DW2/G. My complaint was not heard by the higher authorities. I was informed by Sh. R.N. Sharma the then Deputy Secretary (Home) that complaint/allegations against him were not substantiated. This letter filed by the complainant in her other case i.e. Purnima Gupta V. G.S. Mehra and certified copy of the same is Ex.DW2/DH. Sh. R.N. Sharma mischievously just to cause damage sent a confidential letter to Deputy Commissioner of Police North District directing him to file the case in their office in violation of rules under Schedule Caste and Schedule Tribe Act, he was duty bound to issue directions to the police for registration of the case against Sh. H.K. Dutta u/s 3 of SC & ST Act . He intentionally stopped the police for taking against him. He himself is an offender of Section 4 of SC & ST Act. He neglected his duties U/s 4 of SC & ST Act . This letter is Ex.DW2/DI. This letter is also filed by the complainant in the present case. After closure of my complaint, selected Smt. Purnima Gupta who moved a criminal CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 10 complaint against me. She moved complaint against me on 22.02.01 and second complaint was moved on 17.05.02. After consideration o f both the complaints, Lt. governor, Delhi suspended me from the service on 28.05.02 and I am under suspension from that date. The copy of order is Ex.DW2/DJ. Smt. Purnima Gupta is a quarrelsome lady and that is why she was selected to move a complaint against me by Sh. S.K. Dutta. During the course of trial of this case before Smt. Savita Rao, the then Ld. MM,Mahila Court, Smt. Purnima Gupta insulted and misbehaved with her. I moved a complaint against her to the Chief secretary, Government of Delhi for her misbehaviour with the Ld. Presiding Officer on 27.02.06 alongwith copy of ordersheet dated 08.09.04 passed by the Hon'ble Court. I have sent the copy of this ordersheet to the Chief Secretary but no action was taken by the Government against her. Complainant Purnima Gupta challenged the order of the Court before Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. The copy of petition is Ex.DW2/DK. the said petition was dismissed by the Hon'ble Justice Mr. R.C. Jain vide order dated 06.12.05, the copy of which is Ex.DW2/DL. On the basis of first complaint dated 22.02.01, I am facing a departmental inquiry pending in Vigilance Branch, Govt. of Delhi. During the course of inquiry, the then Inquiry Officer Smt. Manisha Saxena recorded the statement of o ne witness HC Ranbir Singh on 03.05.07. He was cross examined by me in detail for about 5­6 pages. the departmentl inquiry against me was found false and totally fabricated. The Inquiry Officer Smt. Manisha Saxena, Addl. Secretary (Home) mixed up with the complainant Purnima gupta and Presenting Officer Sh. Rajiv Mohan dishonestly committed theft of those papers and copy of the same were not supplied to me. I moved a complaint to the Commissioner of Police and to the Government of Delhi. My complaint was forwarded to the Commissioner of Police by deputy Secretary (Home). The original letter is Ex.DW2/DM. Thereafter, the Government of Delhi transferred the matter to one Janak Juneja. I moved the complaint in brief Ex.DW2/DN. The inquiry is pending without any proceedings for last more than two years. I moved a complaint against Janak Juneja on 15.01.99 to Lt. Governor, Delhi alongwith copy of ordersheet dt. 03.05.07 and 12.07.2008. The copy of complaint alongwith relevant ordersheets is Ex.DW2/DO. Complainant approached the Hon'ble Mahial Commissioner of Delhi. Complainant Purnima Gupta was heard in detail by Smt. Adarsh Mishra, IAS, Principal Secretary, Delhi Commission for Women. The said Commission is civil court within the meaning of the Act. Smt. Purnima Gupta heard as a loving duaghter but I was treated untouchable and stepson. the lettero f Adarsh Mishra is on record which is Ex.DW2/DP. the complaint of Purnjima Gupta was handed over to witness HC Som Dutt. He prepared his report under the directions of Sh. S.K. Dutta after reading the same. The words "shikayat padhli hain" are mentioned at point A in statement Ex.DW2/DQ, the copy of which is already on judicial file. A complaint was also handed over to Sh. R.K. Jain, Sr. Prosecutor. He was my junior rank officer. He personated himself a Magistrate and given a verdict against me vide report Ex.DW2/DR. In this CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 11 letter Sh. R.K. Jain personating himself as Sr. Prosecutor Headquarter at Point A. There is no such course of Sr. Prosecutor in the headquarter. He was having no powers to examine the complaint aganst me as he was working under my subordination. Similarly Purnima Gupta is also showing herself as Sr. Prosecutor in the Headquarter and such post is not existing in the headquarter. Sh. R.K. Jain while posted in the Ld. Court of Sessions used to mishandle the cases with malafide intention. I moved an application to Sh. B.D. Goel about action taken report against Sh. R.K. Jain vide letter dated 30.03.02, copy of the same is Ex.DW2/DS. A chargesheet against me was already drafted by Sh. B.D. Goel at the directions of Sh. G.L. Meena, Deputy Secretary (Home) (witness of sanction). the letter of Sh. G.L. Meena is Ex.DW2/DT. The endorsement of Sh. B.D. Goel regarding drafting of chargesheet below the letter at point A is Ex.DW2/DU. It is also in the judicial record. I am under suspension since May 2002 because of this false case. I am innocent and falsely implicated in this case." In the statement U/s 315 Cr.P.C ., the appellant has tried to convince the court that earlier he was Chief Public Prosecutor and another adhoc Chief P.P. who was junior to him in the seniority list was appointed as P.P. ignoring the appellant. On the representation of the appellant, Lt. Governor of Delhi removed the said Chief P.P. from the post of Public Prosecutor and the appellant was appointed as Public Prosecutor. There was other service litigation/proceedings also between the appellant and other officers of prosecution department. It was stated that complainant was holding the post in Head Quarter which never existed. The appellant's grievance is that he belongs to the Scheduled Caste category and therefore he was harassed by other officers who became junior to him because of his promotion on account of reservation policy of the government. Therefore, those colleagues who were initially senior to him and thereafter, became junior to appellant started disobeying his directions for attending in various courts even in urgent matters. He testified that Ms. P. and Sh. R.K. Jain clearly refused to work under his control. He testified that he had CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 12 made the complaint under SC/ST Act but the higher officials of Government of Delhi did not direct the DCP(North) to register a case under SC/ST Act rather the complainant herein was selected to file the present complaint against the appellant. In support of his submissions, it is argued by Sh. S.P. Sharma, Advocate for appellant that the complainant filed her complaint Ex.PW7/A on 17.05.2002 i.e. after the delay of more than one year. On the other hand, Ld. Addl. P.P. for State has pointed out that Ms. P. (PW7) has also proved her letter dated 22.12.2001 to Principal Secretary (Home) which is Ex.PW7/C and she annexed the copy of this complaint alongwith her complaint Ex.PW7/A which was addressed to Lt. Governor. It is submitted by Ld. Addl. P.P. that the letter dated 22.02.2001 was written on the very day of incident. Ld. Counsel for appellant has pointed out that PW7 has also proved a letter of a member of Delhi Mahilla Ayog referring to the complaint of Ms. P. which is ex.PW7/D These complaints were seized by IO vide seizure memo Ex.PW7/E. Ld. Counsel for appellant has strongly argued that Ms. P. is a part of conspiracy to damage the career of appellant who had superseded his seniors on account of reservation policy. It is argued that such a high delay in making complaint and lodging FIR is an indicator that all the allegations of PW7 are false. I have perused the testimony of PW7 which I have already reproduced above. In the said testimony she has proved the copy of her initial complaint ExPW7/C dated 22.02.2001 addressed to Principal Secretary (Home). The prosecution has examined PW11 Ms. Meena Kumari, Record Keeper, Delhi Commission of Women who brought the copy of letter dated CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 13 08.11.2001 Ex.PW7/D in proof of Delhi Commission of Women recommended action against G.S. Mehra on the complaint of Ms. P. Ld. Counsel for appellant has argued that this letter has not been proved by producing the original letter in the court. I agree with this submission, however I am of the opinion that complainant had sent the copy of this letter alongwith her complaint to Lt. Governor which is Ex.PW7/A. I am not inclined to accept that a Government Official will send a false document alongwith her complaint to the highest constitutional authority of the State. It is pertinent to note that a complaint under SC & ST Act marked DB made by the appellant is dated 16.05.2002 whereas complaint Ex.PW7/A to Lt. Governor is dated 17.05.2002 which means the complaint marked DB was filed one day prior to complaint of complainant (Ex.PW7/A). However, the appellant in his complaint marked DB (Put to the Investigating Officer in cross­examination by the appellant) in para - 8 has specifically referred to the complaint of Ms. P. addressed to Home Department of Delhi on 23.02.2001. This corroborates the testimony of PW7 that she had filed the complaint to Principal Secretary Home which is Ex.PW7/C. However, even if it is presumed that this letter is not proved and there is considerable delay in making the complaint, the testimony of PW7 cannot be thrown away. However, such situation puts the court on alert in examining her testimony. In this case there are many eye­ witnesses. PW8 R.K. Jain who was working as Add. P.P. and was present in the office has fully supported the prosecution case. Ld. Counsel for appellant has strongly assailed the testimony of PW8 on the ground that he was also one of the conspirators who were harassing the CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 14 appellant on account of his promotion above his seniors due to the reservation policy. I could have accepted this submission but profuse evidence is coming from the other witnesses who had seen this incident. PW2 Manoj Kumar was the Peon and was present in the room of PW8 R.K. Jain as he was operating photostat machine. PW2 testified that on 22.02.2001 at about 3.00/3.15 p.m. Sh. G.S. Mehra came in the office of R.K. Jain. By that time, he had finished his work in machine and went in the adjacent room. Suddenly, he heard the noise in loud voice from the room of R.K. Jain. PW2 testified that he recognized the voice of G.S. Mehra and he was uttering the words "bewakoof and badmash". He testified that beside Mehra, R.K. Jain and P. were also present there. PW2 Ct. Yogesh was posted at Reader's branch in prosecution department on the said date. He testified that his room is adjacent to the room of R.K. Jain. Suddenly, he heard loud noise from the room of R.K. Jain. He saw R.K. Jain sitting in the chair and complainant Ms. P. was standing. He testified that accused G.S. Mehra was also standing and was using very abusive language for the complainant and he did not care that a senior lady prosecutor was standing in the room and that he should not use such words in her presence. PW6 ASI Som Dutt was posted as Directorate of Prosecution and he used to deal with appeal matters in the office of Director. On 22.02.2001 he was sitting on his seat which was adjacent to the room of Sh. R.K. Jain, he heard loud noises from the room and he went immediately at the door of the said room. PW6 testified that he saw the appellant standing near Ms. P. and he was abusing her in filthy language by the words of mother and sister and he was in very much CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 15 angry mood. PW6 testified that he was torturing her, he was holding a paper in his hand and was pushing on Ms. P. and was saying that he will see her. PW10 HC Ranbir Singh was also posted in the office of Directorate of Prosecution and he was doing typing work in his office which was near the office of Sh. R.K. Jain, Sr. Public Proseuctor. He heard loud voice of shouting. PW10 testified that he went there and saw that appellant was telling loudly that he was senior officer and Ms. P. cannot ask any information from him. On this Ms. P. told him that he was senior officer and he should not use such language. Thereafter, he came out from his room. All these witnesses have fully supported the prosecution case that incident took place in which appellant was using filthy language to Ms. P. There appears to be some substance in the arguments of Ld. Counsel for appellant that she had not complied with the orders issued by the appellant but at the same time, it does not justify the language which he spoke to the complainant. As all the eye­witnesses have proved the incident even if it is presumed that she did not prove her complaint dated 22.02.2001 Ex.PW7/C as per Indian Evidence Act , same can be ignored. Ld. counsel for appellant argued that in her testimony PW7 has stated that appellant had used certain words towards Director of Prosecution and not to PW7. These arguments are specious. Even if he was addressing someone else, the appellant should have been civil in presence of a lady. I have pointed out that PW7 has testified that appellant abused her in filthy abusive language which caused her humiliation, insult and annoyance and he crossed all limits of decency and abused her in such abusive which are not in a good taste to be described by a lady officer. PW8 R.K. Jain also testified in the same CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 16 way. Even if it is presumed that PW7 & PW8 could have weaved a false story, I have no reason to disbelieve the testimony of other witnesses who were present there. PW3 Ct. Yogesh, who clearly testified that appellant was using very abusive language for the complainant. PW6 has given more detailed narration of the incident. It is pertinent to note that PW7 has testified that appellant whipped out a letter from his pocket and pounced upon her. PW8 has testified that appellant had taken out a rolled paper and pounced upon Ms. P. and touched the rolled paper on the body of Ms. P. PW6 has also supported this version in his evidence. PW10 HC Ranbir Singh has only seen the part of incident in which Ms. P. told the appellant that he was senior officer and he should not use such language. This corroborates the prosecution version that appellant was using filthy language. In view of above discussion, I am of the opinion that there is no substance in the arguments of the appellant. The language spoken by him was of such a filthy nature which was intended to insult the modesty of the complainant. So far as the complaint under SC & ST Act (Mark DB) of the complainant is concerned, he has mentioned that Ms. P. has moved the complaint at the instance of S.K. Dutta and was counter­blast to the proceedings in CAT in which Ms. P. was indicted. The perusal of the entire complaint is nothing but creation of a defence against the complaint of Ms. P. Therefore, I agree with the Trial Court verdict vide which Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate convicted the appellant under Sec.509 IPC. However, I find that the incident took place in the office of Sh. R.K. Jain, which is not a public place. In order to bring an offence under the four corners of Sec.294 IPC, the obscene act should be committed in a CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 17 public place. Therefore, I disagree with the findings of the Trial Court in respect of Sec.294 IPC. Accordingly, conviction and sentence of the appellant under Sec.294 IPC is hereby set aside and appellant is acquitted under Sec.294 IPC. Now I take up the question of sentence. The appellant was sentenced by Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate to Simple Imprisonment for three months under Sec.509 IPC and he was directed to pay compensation of a sum of Rs.20,000/­ to the complainant. In this regard, I would like to refer to the conduct of Ms. P. during the trial, which is recorded by the Presiding Officer in the ordersheet dated 08.09.2004. In this ordersheet, it is mentioned by Ms. Savita Rao, Ld. M.M. that the complainant had moved an application for substitution of Public Prosecutor by her private counsel, which was dismissed by the said court. On this, complainant was heard saying that the Presiding Officer also belonged to Scheduled Caste community whereas accused also belongs to Scheduled Caste, which led to dismissal of the application. Due to the conduct of the complainant during the trial, I am not inclined to grant any compensation to her. Rather the prosecution department is directed to bring the casteist and contemptuous conduct of Ms. P. to the Government of NCT of Delhi as recorded by Ld. M.M. in ordersheet dated 08.09.2004 during trial. Such conduct of a public functionary, which Ms. P. is, must not be ignored. Therefore, copy of this judgment alongwith the copy of the ordersheet dated 08.09.2004 be supplied to the Directorate of Prosecution, who shall forward it to Government of NCT for taking appropriate departmental action as per rules against Ms. P. CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 18 The appellant in the present case has lost his job due to the present incident, which is a big punishment. Considering all facts and circumstances, I modify the sentence awarded by the Trial Court and I sentence him to imprisonment till rising of the court and a fine in the sum of Rs.5000/­. In default of payment of fine, he shall undergo Simple Imprisonment for one month. The appellant had deposited a sum of Rs.20,000/­ as compensation in the Trial Court vide Receipt No. dated 29.01.2016. Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate shall return to the appellant remaining amount of Rs.15,000/­ as per rules and treat the amount of Rs.5000/­ as fine instead of compensation. Copy of judgment be supplied to the appellant free of cost. Copy of this judgment alongwith the Trial Court Record be returned to the Trial Court for its consignment to Record Room. Appeal file be consigned to record room. Announced in Open Court on 03.05.2018 Digitally signed by VINOD KUMAR VINOD KUMAR Date: 2018.05.03 14:35:59 +0530 (Vinod Kumar) Addl. Sessions Judge (Central) g Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi/03.05.2018 CA NO.9/16 Gulab Singh Mehra Vs. State & Ors. 19