Colonel Prem Singh vs . on 24 June, 2011 IN THE COURT OF SHRI PRASHANT SHARMA, METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE - 6, SAKET COURTS COMPLEX, NEW DELHI. Complaint Case No. 844/1 dated 18­12­2008 Colonel Prem Singh ................................................. Complainant. Vs. S.P. Dabas and others ................................................ Accused persons. 23­6­2011 ORDER ON CHARGE 1. This is a warrant trial complaint case filed by a private party. 2. Vide this order I shall decide whether on the basis of pre charge evidence led by the complainant, accused persons can be charged with the relevant sections of IPC or not? 3. The relevant sections at this stage, is section 245 Cr.P.C which says : "if upon taking all the evidence referred to in section 244 , the magistrate considers for reason to be recorded, that no case against the accused has been made out which if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the magistrate shall discharge him." 4. After going through the said provision, the yard stick for framing of charge, at this stage, in this case, is, whether the pre Page No. 1 of 22 charge evidence on record is sufficient to warrant the conviction of the accused or not? If the answer is yes, then charge shall be framed against accused persons and if the answer is to the contrary, then charge shall not be framed. Thus it is clear, that it is not the prima facie nature of the allegations, made by the complainants, which I have to see. Rather the fact, that allegations in question will or will not lead to the conviction of accused persons has to be seen by me. 5. It is settled proposition of law that prosecution / complainants has to stand on its own legs. In the background of aforesaid tenets of criminal law, let us deal with the issue in hand. 6. Before dealing with the issue in hand, it is relevant to mention here the background in which present case is presently placed. 7. There were three complainants initially in this case. During the course of proceedings, complainant no. 3, Smt. Suraj Prem Singh expired. Subsequently, this complaint was pursued by complainant no. 1 and 2. Initially, complainants had filed this complaint against 12 accused persons. Accused no. 1 was summoned U/s 406 IPC and accused no. 7 to 12 were summoned u/s 500 IPC. Complaint against accused no. 2 to 5 was dismissed. All these orders were done by order dated 13­1­2003. Subsequently, the summoning order dated 13­1­2003 was recalled and proceedings were dropped against accused no. 7 to 12 vide order dated 12­5­2004. Subsequently, vide order dated 20­9­2005, V.N. Narayanan, Editor, Hindustan Times, John Dayal, Editor, Delhi Mid­Day and Sat Soni, Editor, Page No. 2 of 22 Sandhya Times, were summoned U/s 500 IPC .. The net result of aforesaid proceedings was that this complaint after 20­9­2005, has proceeded against four accused persons, viz, S.P. Dabas (hereinafter referred as accused no. 1), V.N. Narayanan, Editor, Hindustan Times (hereinafter referred as accused no. 2), John Dayal, Editor, Delhi Mid­Day(hereinafter referred as accused no. 3) and Sat Soni, Editor, Sandhya Times (hereinafter referred as accused no. 4). 8. Case of the complainants is that complainant no. 1 is a retired government servant of unblemished reputation and winner of many medals in Wars waged against India. That complainant no. 2 is his son and complainant no. 3 is his wife. That on 1­3­1996 complainant no. 3 had gone to USA. That in her absence, complainant no. 2 got engaged with the daughter of accused no. 1 on 21­7­1996. On that day, gifts were exchanged between complainant no. 1 and 2 with accused no. 1. That on 11­9­96 complainant no. 3 returned back from USA. That on 17­9­96 horoscopes of the boy and girl in question were matched and complainants discovered certain misrepresentation about the date of birth of accused no. 3. That complainants further discovered that daughter of accused no. 1 was merely a graduate (B.Sc) and not a post graduate (M.Sc), as alleged by the accused no. 1. Complainants did not want to let down the girl in question, and therefore, they went a head with the preparation of the marriage, which was scheduled to take place on 27­11­1996. That on 23­11­96, pooja was performed at the residence of the Page No. 3 of 22 complainants and invitation cards were distributed. That on 24­11­96, Lagan consisting of mutual gifts were exchanged between the complainant and accused no. 1. That on the evening of 24­11­96, complainant no. 2 went to distribute the wedding cards to his friends, when he heard certain remarks passed by some boys with regard to the fact that daughter of accused no. 1 had studied at Moti Lal Nehru College. They also alleged certain desirable things about her which caused disturbance in the minds of complainant no. 2. Subsequently, complainant no. 2 called the daughter of accused no. 1 on the intervening night of 24/25­11­96, for getting the necessary clarification, with regard to the remarks passed by those boys about her. Daughter of accused no. 3, in reply to those clarifications sought by the complainant no. 2, answered that she would make the complainant, pay a heavy price for it. During that period, complainant tried to sort out the matter, but accused no. 1 got an FIR No. 780/1996 registered against the complainant on 26­11­1996, under section 406 / 34 IPC P.S. R.K. Puram. That complainant no. 1 and 2 went to the police station, on being summoned and returned the gifts of accused no. 1 to accused no. 1. But when complainants demanded return of their gifts given to accused no. 1 from accused no. 1, IO concerned arrested them and took away the mobile phone and cash of Rs.10,600/­ from complainant no. 1. He showed the said property as property gifted to complainants by the accused no. 1. That subsequently, accused no. 1 flashed the news of arrest of complainants and dowry demands made by Page No. 4 of 22 them, in leading news papers on 27/28­11­96. That complainant no. 3, complained to the police against the action of accused no. 1, who threatened to eliminate her husband and her son. She also complained that a case of non­returning of gifts, due to be returned to complainants be registered. But police did not take any action on the said complaints. That subsequently, accused persons were released on anticipatory bail on 2­12­1996. That on 8­1­1997 complainant no. 1 sent a legal demand notice with registered AD to accused no. 1, whereby he demanded the return of gift articles entrusted to him by accused no. 1. The said notice was neither replied nor the articles were returned. That complainant no. 1 filed his complaint to the police on 13­1­97, 5­4­97 and 3­5­97 for taking appropriate action against the accused persons. But, police did not take action on the said complaints. That complainant no. 1 also sent notice to accused no. 2 to 4, with regard to the defamatory news published by them on 27/28­11­96. Subsequently, no reply was received by him pertaining to those notices. That subsequently, complainants filed criminal writ petition before Hon'ble Delhi High Court which resulted in quashing of FIR No. 780/96, P.S R.K. Puram. That Hon'ble Delhi High Court further did not direct for registration of FIR against accused persons. That subsequently, against the said order, an SLP was filed by the complainants on 26­8­1998, wherein Hon'ble Apex Court disposed of the same by allowing the complainants to file complaint before the court of Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate. It Page No. 5 of 22 is only after that, that present case was filed by the complainant. 9. Complainants have relied upon documents which are marked. All of them are not relevant for the just decision of the case at this stage. Relevant documents are referred by me as and when, they are required while appreciating the evidence on record. All the said documents are not disputed by the accused persons and are thus deemed to be admitted by them. 10.Accused no. 1 had been summoned by the court U/s 406 IPC . It is to be seen, from the evidence on record, as to whether it is sufficient to convict accused no. 1, u/s 406 IPC , if it goes unrebutted. For proper appreciation of the pre charge evidence, it is relevant to know the ingredients of the offence of criminal breach of trust, defined in section 405 IPC. The essential ingredients of the offence of criminal breach of trust are : a. A person is in any manner entrusted with property or dominion over property. b. He dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use that property or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged or any legal contract (expressed or implied) made by touching discharge of such trust willfully suffers any other person so to do or omit. 11.After going through the complaint and pre charge evidence, I find accused no. 1 can not be charged with section 406 IPC. There are various reasons for the same, which I am discussing Page No. 6 of 22 in subsequent paragraphs. 12.Firstly, case of the complainants is that, they had given certain property as gifts at the betrothal ceremony of complainant no. 2 and the daughter of accused no. 1, to the daughter of accused no. 2. The said marriage did not occur and consequently, complainant want their articles back. In this regard, complainant no. 1 had written a letter dated 8­1­1997 Ex.CW1/Q to accused no. 1, wherein he had demanded the return of articles from accused no. 1. After going through the said letter it is clear that certain articles were entrusted to accused no. 1 and others. Here the expression "others" is relevant. As per Ex.CW1/Q certain articles were given by complainant no. 1, complainant no. 1 and relatives of complainants, to accused no. 1, wife of accused no. 1, daughter of accused no. 1, son of accused no. 1 and elder brother of accused no. 1. The aforesaid persons, to whom the articles as per list Ex.CW1/L were given, constitute the expression "others" used in Ex.CW1/Q. It is not clear and specific as to which article was given to accused no. 1 and which article was given to the other persons mentioned in Ex.CW1/Q. Absence of such specifications, is clear from the complaint in question and from the pre charge evidence on record. It is not the case of the complainants that all the aforesaid articles were retained by accused no. 1 on behalf of his relatives or that accused no. 1 is vicariously responsible for retention and misuse of the articles handed over to his relatives. In the absence of any specific allegations pertaining Page No. 7 of 22 to the articles in question, accused no. 1 can not be convicted, if evidence on record goes unrebutted. Thus, accused no. 1 can not be charged with the offence U/s 406 IPC . 13.Secondly, in order that an offence U/s 405 is committed, two elements are essential, namely, entrustment with property or dominion over any property and dishonest misappropriation or conversion of such property. The offence is completed only when second ingredient is completed and not before that. Mere retention or entrustment does not make an offence. In the case in hand, complainants had only alleged that property in question was entrusted with accused no. 1. They have not alleged that the said property has been misappropriated or converted or used or disposed off by accused no. 1 in violation of any directions given by the complainants. Thus, section 406 IPC is not made out against accused no.1. In this regard, I find support from the judgment given by Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana, in matter Gulzar Singh and others vs. Hazran, 2006 (2) RCR (Criminal) 625. 14.Thirdly, CW1 in his pre charge evidence had stated that articles which were gifted to accused no. 1 were not returned back to him. The essential ingredient of the concerned section i.e. section 406 IPC, viz property being misappropriated by him, was not alleged by him. And, it is settled law that mere retention of articles, could not be attributed any colour of criminality, as held in case of "Ajit Singh, 1983 Cri.L.J (NOC) 71 (P&H)" and "Rex vs. Krishna, AIR 1940 Mad 329". It is pertinent to mention here that mere omission or failure to Page No. 8 of 22 return the entrusted property does not amount to breach of trust, as held in Sardar Singh, AIR 1977 SC 1766. 15.Now let us come to the testimony of CW2. This witness is the son of CW1 and is one of the complainant. In his testimony, he was not sure about Ex.CW1/Z which as per CW1 was alleged to have been written by the mother of CW2. Thus, validity and reliability of document Ex.CW1/Z's becomes doubtful as both the CWs did not give uniform opinion about the same. Further, this witness was not sure about whether Ex.CW1/Q was written by his father or not. Again, validity of Ex.CW1/Q, which was alleged by CW1 to be written by him, regarding demand of gift articles, becomes doubtful, as complainants were not sure and uniform in their stands. Net result of aforesaid discussion is that the demand, in terms of section 406 IPC is not proved to the satisfaction of the court. Thus, 406 IPC is not made out. 16.Fifthly, Ex.CW1/C, photos in question were also relied by complainants. CW2 in his testimony had stated that as per those photographs the articles were handed over to the daughter of accused no. 1. Now by this statement, it becomes clear that the gifts in question were handed over to daughter of accused no. 1 by complainants during Lagan ceremony and they become her stridhan. And as per the case law of " Pratibha Ram Vs. Suraj Kumar , AIR 1985 SC 628" stridhan property remains to be of wife not only during matrimonial home contribution but even after its break. So by this standard also no offence u/s 406 IPC is made out against Page No. 9 of 22 accused no. 1. 17. Section 500 IPC - Next comes the question as to whether accused no. 2, accused no. 3 and accused no. 4 had defamed the complainants or not? For this we have to see the defining provision of the offence of defamation mentioned in section 499 IPC. As per section 499 IPC, the essential ingredients of defamation are : a. A person makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person b. Such imputation is made by words either spoken or intended to be read or.............. c. the offender intends to harm or knows or had reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of that person. d. The case is outside the exception to this section. 18.In addition to the aforesaid ingredients, it is relevant to mention here, the explanation 4, mentioned in the said section. As per the said explanation no imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation, directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or his calling or lowers the credit of said person or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 19.Now let us see what facts were reported by : Page No. 10 of 22 Accused no. 2, Accused no. 3, Accused no. 4, Hindustan Times Mid Day times Sandhya Times a. Colonel Prem a. As per report of a. As per report of Singh and his son Shri S.N. Srivastava, Shri S.N. Srivastava, arrested by R.K. SW, District Police, SW, District Police, Puram police for Chief, Colonel Prem Chief, Colonel Prem dowry demand and Singh and his son Singh and his son criminal breach of arrested by R.K. arrested by R.K. trust on complaint of Puram police for Puram police for S.P. Dabas. dowry demand and dowry demand and criminal breach of criminal breach of trust on complaint of trust on complaint of S.P. Dabas. S.P. Dabas. b. Rs. Six Lacs dowry b. Rs. Six Lacs dowry b. Rs. Six Lacs dowry demand was made by demand was made by demand was made by Prashant Chaudhry Prashant Chaudhry Prashant Chaudhry (CW2) which was not (CW2) which was not (CW2) which was not fulfilled and that is fulfilled and that is fulfilled and that is why, marriage did not why, marriage did not why, marriage did not take place. take place. take place. 20.Now basis of publication of aforesaid facts, by accused no. 2 was FIR No. 780/1996. Further, basis of publication of aforesaid facts by accused no. 3 and 4, was briefing given by Shri S.N. Srivastava, SW District, Police Chief. But one thing was common in the aforesaid publishing. And that was, that Page No. 11 of 22 all the newspapers in questions had reported the news and did not give their opinion or comment or views regarding the incidents in question. This fact is relevant because to constitute the offence of defamation the aspect of mens rea (i.e dishonest intention) is relevant. 21.So far as FIR in question is concerned, the facts mentioned in the newspaper of accused no. 1 ( i.e. Ex.CW2/N) were true and correct. The said FIR does mention the facts that, it was filed on the complaint of accused no. 1, that CW2 on or before 26­11­1996, had demanded Rs. Two Lacs in cash on every occasion, prior to the scheduled marriage in question, that CW2 had also threatened that if that demand was not met then marriage in question will not take place. All the aforesaid facts, clearly show that dowry demand was made by CW2. In addition to those facts, certain articles were handed over to the boy's side by accused no.1, which were not returned. This FIR was registered u/s 406 IPC only. It did not mention the relevant section pertaining to dowry demand based offence. But this absence of provision pertaining to dowry demand, does not make the fact that dowry demand was alleged by CW2, as obsolete. Reason being, that such non­mentioning of provision, was a negligence on the part of the concerned police official who registered the said FIR and nothing more. Moreover, concerned IO, could have filed the chargesheet under the said sections also. That need did not arise in this case, as FIR in question was quashed by Hon'ble Delhi High Court. In addition to the aforesaid factual situation, it is Page No. 12 of 22 admitted case of complaints that they were arrested by the police in the FIR in question. The necessary outcome of the aforesaid factual situation is that, CW2 had demanded the dowry and both the complainants in question were arrested, in case FIR No. 780/96. Accused no.2 had published the aforesaid factual situation in its news daily. Basis of publishing the same was FIR in question. The said FIR, as per section 74 of Indian Evidence Act, is a public document and accused no. 2 did not do anything wrong by publishing the contents of the the said public document. So far as accused no. 3 and 4 are concerned, basis of publishing, the news in question, was reporting / briefing of one of the highly designated police official, who was a public servant. Under normal circumstances, no person of reasonable prudence, would doubt the truthfulness of information received by him or her, from a public servant. More so, where there is no personal enmity with the said public servant. In this case also, the said public servant, was not arrayed as one of the accused persons by the complainants, for reasons best known to the complainants. This absence of not making Mr. S.N. Srivastava, as one of the accused persons, only shows that complainants had no grudge or grievance against him. Further, it is not the case of the complainants, that the briefing done by Mr. S.N. Srivastava was false and baseless. And, after going through the news items viz Ex.CW1/O and Ex.CW1/N, I find that the news mentioned therein, is nothing but the factual situation mentioned in the FIR 780/96 P.S. R.K. Puram. Thus, keeping in Page No. 13 of 22 mind the aforesaid facts and circumstances, I come to the conclusion that the news reports in question published by accused no. 2 to 4 were correct. 22.Next comes the object of Media / Newspapers. In common understanding, one of the objective of media is to report the incidents, occurring in society. Normally, these reports, are devoid of any personal grudge against any person. But, if such reportings are made to malign reputation of any person or make any imputation to lower his reputation in the estimation of others, then as per section 101 of Indian Evidence Act burden of proving the said fact lies on him. In this case, complainants have no where asserted in their complaint and in their pre charge evidence that accused no. 2 to 4 had published the said news report in question, to caste imputation on them, with intention to lower the character or reputation of complainants in the estimation of others. The only thing they had stated about the said accused persons, was that the news items in question were derogatory and defamatory and had caused irreparable damage to their reputation, in amongst their relatives and friends. Whether the said news items were published with intention to harm or knowingly or having reason to believe that such news items will be an imputation which will harm the reputation of the complainants, is a different question, which remained unanswered in the pre charge evidence of the complainants. 23.One of the essential ingredient of section 499 IPC , is the fact that imputation in question must lower the character or Page No. 14 of 22 reputation of the person aggrieved, in the estimation of others. Here, the expression, "estimation of others", which is mandatory to constitute the offence u/s 500 IPC, is relevant. Complainants did not examine any person apart from themselves, to show that their reputation or credit or character, was lowered, as a result of publication of news items in question. Further, they did not give any evidence as to for what extent, if any, their reputation had been damaged, due to publication of news items in question. It is relevant to mention here that while determining a person's reputation the persons opinion about himself is not relevant. Injury to feelings of a man can not be defamation. This was held in the case Prof. Imtiyaz Ahmed Vs. Durdana Zameer , decided on 2nd March, 2009 by Hon'ble Delhi High Court, 1984 Cri.L.J 1790. Thus, section 500 IPC, is not made out due to absence of this essential ingredient. 24."Imputation" in the section 499 IPC means accusations against a person and implies an allegation of fact of not merely a term of abuse. In the case in hand, there is no imputation from the personal side of the newspaper in question rather reports based on public document or public servant. 25."Public good" in the case was that public must know what wrong customs were prevalent in the society and how those following the same were dealt with by the law. Whether allegations in question were true or false is beyond the scope of this order. And thus, I am not giving my opinion on them. Thus, accused no. 2, accused no. 3 and accused no. 4 did Page No. 15 of 22 public good by reporting the true facts based on public documents or those stated by public servant. 26.Further in this case CW1 has deposed that he was defamed by the publication of news by accused no. 2 to accused no. 4. CW2, son of CW1, has not alleged that he was defamed by the said publications. This shows that it was only CW1 who was defamed and had grievance against the accused no. 2 to 4, and not CW2. This view seems to be the personal view of CW1. There is nothing on record which show and prove that after the publication in question the reputation of CW1 was so affected that it led to some loss or damage in their personal or professional life. As per the testimony of CW2, subsequent to the incident in question, he was married and the said marriage was attended by some of his friends. Further, it is pertinent to mention here that complainants did not call anybody in the marriage of CW2. In the absence of any explanation, for not calling any relative, it seems that the society or the relatives did not ignored them rather complainants had ignored them. The net result is, there is nothing on record which show or prove that as a result of publication of news items in question, reputation of complainant (CW1) was lowered or harmed. 27.In this case, concerned news papers, had reported, certain facts in their news daily, which were true in facts and and substance. Their mere publication, do not make them primarily responsible for the offence of defamation, as held in the case law (1999) 1 Recent Criminal Reporter 79 (P & H). Page No. 16 of 22 28.In the background of aforesaid facts and circumstances, I am of the view that besides the fact that ingredients of section 499 IPC are not made out, the case of accused no. 2 to 4 regarding articles in question squarely falls under the explanation 1 of section 499 IPC which says that it is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for public good, the imputation should be made or published. Thus, accused no. 2 to 4 are not liable to be charged with section 500 IPC. 29.Before adverting towards the conclusion it is relevant to appreciate the truthfulness, quality and trustworthiness of complainant witnesses on record. The rule now accepted to all system of jurisprudence is that evidence should be weighed, not counted. Even if there is only one witness, and the court is satisfied that he is speaking the truth, it is sufficient. The fact that there are a number of witnesses means nothing if the court thinks they are not speaking the truth. The law is stated in section 137 of Evidence Act, which says : "no particular number of witness shall in any case be regarded for the proof of any fact." 30.In this case, CW1 is the person having main grievance against the accused persons. 31.CW2 being his son, has supported him to the extent that his father had filed and had pursued the present case, though he had no grievance against the accused persons. His testimony shows the same. CW2 in his testimony has stated his Page No. 17 of 22 ignorance about certain facts viz regarding the occurrence of Lagan ceremony, whether beside bride side had brought any Lagan to their family or not, whether accused no. 1 with his relatives had come on 25­11­96 or not, what was the cause of breaking up of marriage in question, whether document ex.CW1/Z was written by her mother or not. In addition to such ignorant attitude this witness also acted in an after thought manner by producing marriage cards in his examination in chief i.e. Ex.CW2/S1 and Ex.CW2/S2, even though he could have filed the same at the time of filing of complainant. His explanation that he overlooked the same doe not come to his rescue, and only creates doubt over his testimony. Further, he did not take active part in issuance of legal notices in question and could not give any firm opinion with regard to the fact as to whether he agreed or disagreed with the contents of the legal notices in question. He did not know the contents of legal notices in question till the day of filing of the same. In the back ground of aforesaid evidence on record, what is writ large is that CW2 had no grievance against accused persons rather it was CW1 who had grievance against them. Testimony of CW2 is of no help to CW1, as it is full of ignorance, improvements and non uniform conduct, as he evaded the questions put to him during cross examination. Thus, I am not believing the testimony of CW2. 32.CW1 is the main aggrieved party in this case. Firstly, let us consider his creditworthiness and trustworthiness U/s 406 IPC , as alleged by him against accused no. 1. He, as per his Page No. 18 of 22 allegation, had written letter Ex.CW1/Q dated 8­71­97 to accused no. 1. Here, he had demanded the articles advanced by him to accused no. 1 and his relatives from accused no. 1 only. This letter is accompanied with a list of articles, sought to be returned. This letter did not specify that the said sought articles were misused or intended to be misused by accused no. 1. Further, by reading this letter one gets the impression that the said articles were either retained by accused no. 1 or accused no. 1 is only responsible for returning of the said articles. In other words, as per CW1, on the basis of said letter, criminal breach of trust under section 406 IPC was done by accused no. 1 only, on his behalf and on behalf of his relatives. After this letter, CW1 has relied upon letter dated 13­1­1997, Ex.CW1/R in which he had prayed for registration of FIR against wife, daughter, son and brother of accused no. 1 in addition to accused no. 1 for non returning of articles in question under section 406 IPC. This letter gives the impression that the offence of criminal breach of trust was done by the said persons, iIn addition to accused no. 1. It is pertinent to mention here that the list of articles annexed by CW1 no where specifies with clarity as to which articles were handed over by the complainants to whom. This was necessary so as to come to conclusion as to who had misappropriated, which property so that any offence U/s 406 IPC could be made out. Then CW1 has relied upon letter addressed to DCP, SW District, New Delhi ExCW1/S dated 5­4­1997 and in the 5th Para of the said letter it was stated that Page No. 19 of 22 on the intervening night of 24/25­11­1996 when CW2 called daughter of accused no. 1 for knowing the truth of allegations made by certain boys against her, "she did not deny the allegation and did not say anything." Here, reference to original complaint in question before this court is relevant. In para no. 10 of the complaint in question it is stated that on the said night daughter of accused no. 1 had replied that "she would make the complainant pay a heavy price for it". These two are diametrically opposite stands. This fact shows that complainant CW1 is not sure about what had actually happened between his son and daughter of accused no. 1. To make things further worse and doubtful, CW2 in his testimony had stated that daughter of accused no. 1 had stated on the said night " Tujhe to main jail main dekh lungi ." These different and contradictory improved allegations show allegations are at the beck and call of complainants. They make them or with hold them as they wish. They produce documents or withhold them as per their convenience, even though the same amount to improvement from their earlier stands. Though case against daughter of accused no. 1 was dropped at the initial stage of this case but aforesaid facts were relevant to be mentioned here so as to appreciate as to for what extent CW1 / CW2 can be relied and believed in this case. 33.Next comes the issue of CW1 with accused no. 2 to 4. CW1 has no where stated the essential ingredients of section 499 IPC. He has failed to prove the falsity of the statement published in the newspapers in question and malice on the part of the Page No. 20 of 22 accused no. 2 to 4. He did not give evidence as to how his personal or professional life, was affected after the publication of news items in question. His allegations of damage to his reputation, was not cushioned by some independent and believable evidence. 34.Lastly, document Ex.CW1/D­2 written by accused no. 1 to CW1 needs to be discussed and appreciated. This document was put to CW2 who was neither addressed nor its copy was addressed to CW2. Thus, CW2, rightly was in no position to answer the validity or illegality of the said document. Besides this, nothing more needs to be discussed here regarding this document, as it is the copy of the original and not proved as per law. 35. In the background of aforesaid discussion I am of the view that no offence against the accused persons is made out for which they can be charged in this case. 36.I have gone through the case laws filed by the complainant which are stated as below : S. Case Laws Reasons for which the case law No. is not applicable. 1 Jeffrey J. Diermeier and Evidence was not recorded and another Vs. State of West summoning order was Bengal and another, (2010) 6 challenged by the aggrieved Supreme Court Cases 243. party. 2 State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. Case based on registration of FIR Vangaveeti Nagaiah, (2009) and not a private complaint. Page No. 21 of 22 12 Supreme Court Cases 466. 3 State of Assam Vs. Union of This case is based on legal India and others, (2010) 10 principles of Civil Procedure Supreme Court Cases 408. Code. 4 Dilip chakraborty and Factually different case and issue another vs. Public was altogether different. Prosecutor and another, 1976 Cri.L.J 1300, Calcutta High Court. 5. Article of times news Not applicable to the given facts network. and circumstances of this case. 37.Accordingly, all the accused persons are discharged. Bail bonds are cancelled. Sureties stands discharged. Endorsement be cancelled. Documents, if any, be returned to its rightful owner after taking appropriate receipt. Copy of this order be given dasti to the complainant. 38.File be sent to records after necessary compliance. Announced in open court ( PRASHANT SHARMA ) today i.e. 23­6­2011. M.M.­06, Saket Courts, New Delhi. Page No. 22 of 22