D.Prabhu vs K.M.Panchayutham on 21 August, 2018 Author: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan Bench: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS RESERVED ON : 02.08.2018 PRONOUNCED ON : 21.08.2018 CORAM: THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE G.K.ILANTHIRAIYAN CRL.A.No.82 of 2011 and Crl.R.C..Nos.83, 400 of 2011 and 858 of 2012 Crl.A.No.82 of 2011 D.Prabhu ... Appellant/Complainant Vs 1.K.M.Panchayutham 2.Durai Subramaniam 3.R.Harikrishnan 4.E.J.Kanna Udayar ... Respondents/A2 to A5 Prayer: Criminal Appeal filed under Section 378 (4) of Cr.P.C., to call for the entire records pertaining to the judgment passed in C.C.No.118 of 2005 dated 30.10.2010 acquitting the accused 2 to 5/respondents herein on the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court No.II, Ulundurpet and set aside the same and convict and sentence the accused 2 to 5 in accordance with law. For Appellant : Mr.R.Natarajan For Respondents : Mr.S.Saravanakumar for RR1-3 Mr.V.Perarasu for R4 Crl.R.C..No.83 of 2011 D.Prabhu ... Petitioner/Complainant Vs 1.M.Anbazhagan 2.P.Bharathi ... Respondents/A1 and A6 Prayer: Criminal Revision filed under Section 377 r/w Section 401 of Cr.P.C., to call for the entire records pertaining to the conviction and sentence passed in C.C.No.118 of 2005 dated 30.10.2010 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court No.II, Ulundurpet insofar as accused 1 and 6 being the respondents herein and enhance the sentence appropriately with the relief of compensation by modifying the sentence passed in C.C.No.118 of 2005 against and accused 1 and 6. For Petitioner : Mr.R.Natarajan For Respondents : Mr.S.Saravanakumar Crl.R.C..No.400 of 2011 Anbazhagan ... Petitioner/Appellant/A1 Vs T.Prabhu ... Respondent/Respondent/ Complainant Prayer: Criminal Revision filed under Section 397 and 401 of Cr.P.C., to call for the entire records pertaining to the judgment dated 23.12.2010 passed by the Principal Sessions Judge, Villupuram in C.A.No.52 of 2010 confirming the judgment dated 28.10.2010 passed by the Judicial Magistrate No.II, Ulundurpet made in C.C.No.118 of 2005 and set aside the same and acquit the petitioner. For Petitioner : Mr.S.Saravanakumar For Respondent : Mr.R.Natarajan Crl.R.C..No.858 of 2011 D.Prabhu ... Petitioner/Respondent/ Complainant Vs M.Anbazhagan ... Respondent/Appellant/A1 Prayer: Criminal Revision filed under Section 377 r/w 401 of Cr.P.C ., to call for the records pertaining to the conviction and sentence passed in C.A.No.52 of 2010 dated 23.12.2010 on the file of the Principal Sessions Judge, Villupuram insofar as accused 1 being the respondent herein and enhance the sentence appropriately with the relief of compensation by modifying the sentence passed in C.A.No.52 of 2010 dated 23.12.2010 against the accused No.1. For Petitioner : Mr.R.Natarajan For Respondent : Mr.S.Saravanakumar COMMON JUDGMENT Since the appeal and all the revisions are arising out of the judgment dated 28.10.2010 made in C.C.No.118 of 2005 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.2, Ulundurpet, this criminal appeal and revisions are heard together and a common judgment is passed. 2.Crl.A.No.82 of 2011 and Crl.R.C.Nos.83 of 2011, 400 of 2011 and 858 of 2012 have been preferred for the relief stated above. 3. The case of the prosecution is that P.W.1 is the complainant. He was working as Sugarcane Officer at Chengalvarayan Co-operative Sugar Mills Limited, Periyasevalai village from 02.07.1988. His duty was issuing manure to the agriculturists and maintaining the agriculturists and distributing sugarcane and seeds to the agriculturists. While being so, the accused persons without any prima facie, printed phamplets and issued to the general public and all the Government Officers. The said phamplets contain 8 reasons for their agitation of Lock and Seal, in which, the fourth reason pertains to defame the complainant, which reads as follows: btsp Miyf;F fUk;g[ th';fp jUk; fUk;g[ g[nuhf;fh;fspd; jiyth; fUk;g[ mYtyh; jpU.gpug[t[ld; ifnfhh;j;J bry;Yk; Ml;rpah; vt;thW jpwd;gl eph;thfk; bra;a Koa[k;. It was also sent to Chief Minister's Cell and all the departments to take immediate action against the complainant and other officers, who hand in glove with him. Hence, the complainant filed the private complaint. 4.The learned Judicial Magistrate had taken cognizance for the offence under Sections 499 and 501 of I.P.C. as against all the accused persons and issued summons. On summons, they appeared and denied the charges and claimed for trial. The complainant examined P.Ws.1 and 2 to support his case and marked Exs.P1 to P10. On the defence side, the sixth accused examined himself as defence witness (D.W.1) and marked Ex.D1. 5.When the accused were questioned under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. about the incriminating evidences against them, they denied the same. On the basis of the records and evidences, the trial Court convicted the first and sixth accused and sentenced the first accused to pay a fine of Rs.3,000/- in default to undergo three months simple imprisonment for the offence under Section 501 of I.P.C. and sentenced the sixth accused to pay a fine of Rs.300/- in default to undergo three days simple imprisonment for the offence under Section 501 of I.P.C. The trial Court acquitted the accused 2 to 5 from all the charges. 6.As against the said conviction and sentence, A1 preferred Crl.A.No.52 of 2010 before the Principal Sessions Judge, Villupuram, where, the appeal was dismissed, confirming the judgment dated 28.10.2010 made in C.C.No.118 of 2005 passed by the Judicial Magistrate No.2, Ulundurpet. Against which, A1 filed Crl.R.C.No.400 of 2011 before this Court to acquit him and the complainant preferred Crl.R.C.No.858 of 2012 to enhance the sentence against A1. At the same time, the complainant preferred Crl.A.No.82 of 2011 against the acquittal of A2 to A5 and also preferred Crl.R.C.No.83 of 2011 to enhance the sentence and also for compensation under Section 357 of Cr.P.C. 7.Mr.R.Natarajan, the learned counsel appearing for the complainant contended that the Judicial Magistrate erred in holding that the offence as against A2 to A5 is not proved. When the name of A1 to A6 are printed in phamplets and all are standing in same footing, A2 to A5 are also liable to be convicted. He further contended that Ex.P6, legal notice caused to all the accused persons and the same were duly received by them. Even then, they did not choose to send any reply. Therefore, adverse inference has to be drawn against all the accused persons and all are liable to be convicted. 8.He further contended that P.W.2, Administrator of Chengalvarayan Co-operative Sugar Mills Limited, has duly accorded sanction to prosecute against the accused persons and after issuance of sanction only, the legal notices sent to the accused persons. Since P.W.2 categorically deposed that because of Ex.P1, phamplet, the name of the complainant/P.W.1 extensively damaged and tarnished among the public and he is liable to be compensated under Section 357 of Cr.P.C. Further, he has also lost his promotion and as such monetary wise, he occurred loss and the said loss to be compensated by appropriate compensation. 9.He further contended that even though several names were printed in Ex.P1, no need to implicate all the persons as accused in the complaint. If at all, any materials to show against the said persons, who involved in the crime, they can be very well implicated as accused under Section 319 of Cr.P.C. Therefore, the learned counsel prayed for conviction as against A2 to A5 and enhancement of conviction and sentence against A1 and A6 and also prayed to order compensation for the complainant. 10.Per contra, Mr.S.Saravanakumar and V.Perarasu, the learned counsel appearing for the accused persons jointly contended that the alleged phamplet Ex.P1 contained so many names, in which, the complainant added only A1 to A6 and simply left out others. The non inclusion of other persons as accused, who were standing in the same footing, is fatal to the case of the complainant. In the alleged phamplet, the proposed lock and seal agitation is stated to be held on 04.04.2005 at about 09.00 a.m. But, before that, there was a compromise between the management and the workers and hence, there was no agitation and they dropped all the proceedings in pursuant to the alleged phamplet, which is also admitted by P.Ws.1 and 2 and as such, the accused 1 and 6 are liable to be acquitted. 11.They have further contended that the offence under Section 499 is not attributed any one of the accused, since they have no mensrea to defame and tarnish the name of the complainant among the public and in the related department. The proposed agitation is only for some irregularity in the administration of the Sugar mill and not to defame or tarnish any of the individual and as such, there is no specific defamable words or any material in the alleged phamplet, Ex.P1 against the complainant. Further they contended that there is absolutely no evidence to show that A1 only has prepared the alleged phamplet and he cannot be convicted on the evidence of D.W.1, who is none other than the sixth accused. The complainant failed to prove that only on the instructions of A1, A6 printed the phamplet. Further, there is no evidence to show that the alleged phamplet was circulated to all the Officers and to the general public. P.W.2 deposed that P.W.1 was joined in the Sugar mill on 02.07.1988 and only after 20 years of his service, he would get promotion. The alleged occurrence had taken place on 04.04.2005 and as such, for this alleged phamplet, he was not refused to grant any promotion. Therefore, there is no damage caused to P.W.1 and he is not liable to be compensated. Therefore, he prayed for acquittal of A1 and A6 from all the charges. 12.Heard the rival submissions made by Mr.R.Natrajan, learned counsel appearing for the complainant and Mr.S.Saravanakumar and Mr.Perarasu, learned counsel appearing for the accused persons and perused the materials placed before this Court. 13.The phamplet is marked as Ex.P1 through P.W.1. P.W.1 deposed that on the date fixed as per Ex.P1 for lock and seal agitation, no agitation was held. But, the distribution of Ex.P1 tarnished his name and spoiled his administration in the Sugar mill. The specific reason stated in the phamplet is that btsp Miyf;F fUk;g[ th';fp jUk; fUk;g[ g[nuhf;fh;fspd; jiyth; fUk;g[ mYtyh; jpU.gpug[t[ld; ifnfhh;j;J bry;Yk; Ml;rpah; vt;thW jpwd;gl eph;thfk; bra;a Koa[k;. As such, he was being the Sugarcane Officer of the mill, could not procure sugarcanes from the agriculturists. As such, he requested P.W.2 to accord sanction to prosecute the accused persons by the letter, which is marked as Ex.P2. On 19.04.2006, P.W.2, the Administrator of the Sugar mill accorded sanction and the sanction is marked as Ex.P3. After accorded sanction by P.W.2, P.W.1 issued legal notice to all the accused persons, wherein, he sought for compensation of Rs.10 lakhs and apology from the accused persons. The said legal notices were duly received by the accused persons and they did not reply to the said legal notices. It is clear from the evidence of D.W.1, who is none other than the sixth accused that only on the instructions of A1, he printed the phamplets, Ex.P1. Though he is not the owner of the press, he claimed that one Kolunchirajan is the owner of the press and he did not mark any document to show that the said Kolunchirajan is the owner of the press. There is no material to show that the press is belong to said Kolunchirajan. In Ex.P1, the reason No.4 would clearly pointed out the complainant's name, which clearly proves that A1 only, with the intention to defame the complainant, instructed A6 to print the phamplet. 14.It is the contention of the learned counsel appearing for A1 that the complainant failed to examine any independent witness to prove the charge. P.W.2, who is the Administrator of Sugarcane Co-operative Mill, categorically deposed that he perused the request letter and phamblet Ex.P1 and after his satisfaction, he accorded sanction to prosecute A1 to A6 herein. P.W.2 also deposed that because of the phamplet Ex.P1, the name of the complainant has been tarnished and suspected his administration in the mill by the superior Officers, which would also affect the consumers and agriculturists. P.W.2 is not the relative of P.W.1. As such, the trial Court rightly convicted A1 and A6 and it was also confirmed by the appellate Court. There is no illegality or infirmity on the findings of the Courts below to interfere with the conviction and sentence imposed against A1 and A6. 15.The other contention of the learned counsel appearing for the complainant is that the complainant is entitled for compensation for the agony suffered by him physically and mentally and he has to be compensated by way of compensation. P.W.2, who is the Administrator of the Mill deposed that P.W.1/complainant joined in the Sugar mill on 02.07.1988 and he would get promotion only after 20 years. Admittedly, the alleged occurrence happened on 04.04.2005 and as such, his promotion would not get affected by the issuance of Ex.P1 phamblet issued by A1. P.W.1 deposed in his evidence as follows: ehd; gHFk; thof;ifahsh; kj;jpapYk; vdf;F vdJ ew;bgaUf;F fs';fk; Vw;gLj;Jk; tifapy; vjphpfspd; bray; mike;J tpl;lJ. Miy eph;thfj;jplKk; vdJ ew;bgaUf;F fs';fk; Vw;gLj;Jk; tifapy; vjphpfs; bray;gl;Ls;sdh;. ,jdhy; vd; gjtp cah;t[k; epWj;jp itf;fg;gl;Ls;sJ. ,e;j rk;gtj;jhy; jdpg;gl;l Kiwapy; vdf;F kd cisr;ry; Vw;gl;Ls;sJ. Kd;g[ khjphp epk;kjpahf ntiy bra;a ,aytpy;iy. nkw;go rk;gtj;jpw;F jiyik Vw;W elj;j Kd; te;j tifapy; 1tJ vjphpa[k; Kd;dpiy Vw;W elj;j Kd; te;j tifapy;; 2 Kjy; 5 vjphpfSk;> ,e;j mtJ}W gpuRuj;ij mr;rpl;l tifapy; 6 vjphpa[k; fz;of;fj;jf;fth;fs; Mthh;fs;. 16.From the above evidence, it is clear that admittedly, P.W.1 did not claim any compensation from the accused. He further deposed that except the reason No.4, other reasons are pertaining to Chengalvarayan Co-operative Sugar mill and the Sugarcane Producers' Welfare Union. Further, he admitted that after compromise between the association, as per the phamplet, there was no agitation by the accused persons. Therefore, P.W.1 did not suffer any monetary loss by his non- promotion or by salary. He did not even face any departmental proceedings on the basis of the phamblet Ex.P1, issued by A1. Therefore, the appellate Court rightly rejected the contention of claiming compensation and confirmed the conviction imposed by the trial Court. 17.Another contention of the learned counsel appearing for the complainant is that A2 to A5 are standing in the same footing of A1 and A6 and as such, they are liable to be convicted. It is seen from the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2, there is no materials as against A2 to A5. Even in Ex.P1, though their names printed to connect them with the reason No.4, there is no material evidence. Further, there is no evidence to show that only because of Ex.P1 phamblet, there were failures in administration and procurement of sugarcane to the mill is affected. In respect of A2 to A5, cross examination of P.W.2 would read thus: nehl;o]py; fUk;g[ cw;gj;jpahsh; r';fk;> fUk;g[ cw;gj;jpahsh; ghJfhg;g[ r';fk;> fUk;g[ tptrha rq;fj;jpdh;fs; kw;Wk; r';f cWg;gpdh;fs; vd;W nghlg;gl;Ls;sJ. Mdhy; me;j r';fj;ijg; gw;wpa tptunkh> me;j r';fj;ijg; gw;wpa egh;fs; gw;wpa tptunkh vdf;F vJt[k; bjhpahJ. me;j r';fj;ij rhh;e;j cWg;gpdh;fnsh> bghWg;gpy; cs;sth;fnsh nghuhl;lj;jpy; fye;J bfhz;lhh;fsh> mikjp ngr;R thh;j;ijapy; fye;J bfhz;lhh;fsh vd;w tptuk; vdf;Fj; bjhpahJ. nehl;Orpy; Fwpg;gpl;Ls;s midj;J egh;fisa[k; ,e;j tHf;fpy; nrh;f;fg;gltpy;iy. jiyik kw;Wk; Kd;dpiy vd;W nghlg;gl;oUe;j egh;fspd; bgah;fs; kl;Lk; ,e;j tHf;fpy; nrh;f;fg;gl;Ls;sJ. rpy cWg;gpdh;fs; me;j nghuhl;lj;jpw;Fk; j';fSf;Fk; ve;j rk;ge;jKk; ,y;iy vd;W vd;dplk; nehpy; TwpapUf;fpwhh;fs;. mjpy; xUth; fpUc&;zK:h;j;jp eha[L kw;wth;fs; gw;wp vdf;F "hfgk; ,y;iy. He further deposed that he did not implead all the persons in the complaint, whose names mentioned in Ex.P1. Admittedly, A2 to A5 did not involve in any activity as against the complainant. Further, there is no ocular and material evidence to connect A2 to A5 in this case and they are rightly acquitted by the Courts below. 18.For enhancement of punishment imposed against A1 and A6, the learned counsel appearing for the complainant cited the judgment reported in 1929 MWN 114  Assan Musaliarakath Kunhi Bava V. Emperor , where the issue is arisen out of conviction for the offences under Sections 193 , 196 and 470 of I.P.C. and sentenced the accused till the raising of the Court. However, in the case on hand, conviction has been given only for the offence under Section 501 of I.P.C. and as such , the said judgment is not applicable to the facts of the present case. 19.He would further relied upon a judgment of this Court in Jaga Industries V. Sulochana Cotton Spinning Mills Pvt. Ltd. , reported in (2009) 1 MLJ 1067, wherein, this Court has held that an adverse inference can be drawn against the defendants, for their failure to issue a reply to the legal notice issued by the plaintiff, prior to filing of the suit. The learned counsel for the appellant contended that non issuance of any reply to the legal notice Ex.P6, amounts to admission of the averments made in the legal notice and an adverse inference has to be drawn against P2 to P5. In civil cases, it can be drawn for failure to issue reply notice, whereas, in the case on hand for the offence of defamation, adverse inference cannot be drawn against the accused for non issuance of reply notice. It is also seen from the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 as against A2 to A5, there is absolutely no evidence as aforementioned to connect them with the offence of defamation. Accordingly, the persons, whose name merely found in Ex.P1 phamplet cannot be convicted Further, P.W.2 has accorded sanction to prosecute A1 to A6 and as such, subsequent to that, issuance of legal notice has no role to play to prosecute the accused persons. 20.Further, the learned counsel cited the judgment reported in (2017) 16 Supreme Court Cases 466  Suresh Chandra Jana Vs. State of West Bengal , to claim compensation. As discussed above, the complainant is not entitled for any compensation payable by the convicted accused A1 and A6. Furthermore , the said judgment is arising our of a murder case and hence, the same is not applicable to the present case on hand. 21.The learned counsel appearing for A1 cited the judgment reported in (2002) 6 Supreme Court Cases 494  Toran Singh Vs. State of M.P. , wherein, the Apex Court has held as follows: Apart from material contradictions and omissions in the statements of witnesses, these factors clearly indicate the serious infirmities and improbabilities of the prosecution case giving rise to grave doubts as to the involvement of the appellant in the commission of the offence. 7.The substantial portion of the judgment of the trial court is contained in the narration of prosecution story and referring to the prosecution witnesses. We hardly find evaluation, analysis or scrutiny of evidence in a proper perspective objectively. With regard to serious infirmities pointed out by the defence raising doubt of the prosecution case, the learned Sessions Judge has simply stated that he did not agree with such contentions. The trial court, in our view, was not right and justified in lightly brushing aside the infirmities and improbabilities brought out from the prosecution case, that too when the entire prosecution case rested on sole eye-witness, who was interested being the son of the deceased; more so in the absence of any corroboration of his evidence by other independent evidence on material aspects of the prosecution case. It is unfortunate that the High Court has simply endorsed the conviction and sentence passed by the trial court without objectively and satisfactorily scrutinizing and examining the evidence as a first court of appeal except narrating the prosecution case and referring briefly to the evidence of few prosecution witness. The reason recorded by the High Court is to be seen in para 10 of the judgment which reads:- "Thus in the absence of plausible defence by the appellant and the fact that the deceased had stayed in the house of appellant and in the absence of the explanation as to the cause of death, the appellant is liable to be convicted. Deposition of PW-1 Puran inspires confidence and finds support from the medical evidence." 8.In the light of what we have stated above, we find it difficult to agree with the High Court as to how deposition of PW-1 Puran Singh inspires confidence. As is evident from the above para, the High Court instead of giving benefit of doubt to the appellant, placed the burden on the defence and found that there was absence of plausible defence and explanation by the appellant. The case of the prosecution should rest on its strength not on the absence of explanation or plausible defence by the accused. The Hon'ble Apex Court held in the above judgment that the prosecution case should rest on his own strength not on absence of explanation or plausible defence by the accused. In the case on hand, on the basis of D.W.1's evidence, it is categorically proved that only on the written request submitted by A1, phamplet Ex.P1 is printed and distributed. The sixth accused, after knowing the contents of the phamplet, printed the same. Therefore , the said judgment is not relevant to the present case. 22.The learned counsel appearing for A2 to A5 relied upon the judgment reported in 2018 AIAR (Criminal) 18  Khekh Ram V. State of H.P. , wherein, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held that if two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate Court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial Court. The said decision is squarely applicable to this case. The Trial Court acquitted A2 to A5 as no ocular and materials evidence to connect them to attract the offence under Sections 499 and 501 of I.P.C. The appellate Court has also confirmed the same. Therefore, the order of acquittal as against A2 to A5 has no infirmity and no need to interfere with the acquittal. 23.The learned counsel appearing for A1 would rely upon the decision reported in 2010 Crl.L.J. 1277  Standard Chartered Bank V. Vinay Kumar Sood and Others , wherein, the Delhi High Court has held as follows: 17. Besides, requirement of publishing any imputation concerning the complainant is also missing in this case. This telegram was sent to the complainant only. The alleged information by accused No.4 to the wife of the complainant cannot in any manner be considered as defamatory. The intimation communicated to the wife of the complainant was that there were no dues left to be claimed in the account of the complainant and in case any communication was received from the bank in future, the same should be ignored. 18. ........ 19. The Civil Court in a suit for mandatory injunction and for damages decreed the suit of the complainant awarding damages to him against the bank. The observations of the Civil Court in the said suit that the persistent acts of the bank without any ground was defamatory in nature and harmed the reputation of the complainant might be relevant, however, they are not conclusive and binding on the Magistrate to be followed and accepted. The reason being the Civil Court has to appreciate the evidence of the plaintiff in a suit for damages based on defamation with a different yardstick and is not required to assess the evidence with a view to find out if any criminality was involved. In other words, the Civil Court is not concerned whether such acts of defamation were malafidely done with an intention to lower and harm the reputation of the plaintiff in the eyes of his family members and others. For inviting the provisions contained in Section 499 / 500 IPC which are penal in nature, a Magistrate has to consider if the requirement of mens rea which is a mandate for a criminal defamation punishable under Section 500 IPC was fulfilled. If mens rea or criminal intention is lacking or is missing in the act of the accused, he cannot be held guilty for an offence of defamation within the meaning of Section 499 IPC. In this case the image or reputation of the complainant was not tarnished in any manner by the petitioner bank. None of the correspondence were ever published or sent to any other person other than the complainant himself. Besides, none of these correspondence indicate that the bank used such language in the letters sent to the complaint which could be termed as defamatory, especially the telegram dated 17.9.2002 or the telephone call received by his wife. Therefore, prima facie, the complaint did not disclose any offence of defamation made out against the petitioner bank. 20. Undisputedly, the petitioner is a bank incorporated in England with limited liability by Royal Charter, 1853 and, therefore, is a corporation/company. A company cannot be in any case held to have committed an offence under Section 500 IPC because, most essential ingredient of the said offence i.e. mens rea" would be missing as a company is a juristic entity or an artificial person, whereas a Director is not a company. The company may be made liable for offences, however, if there is anything in the definition or context of a particular Section of a particular statute which would prevent the application of the said section to a limited company, the limited company cannot be proceeded against. There are number of provisions of law in which it would be physically impossible by a limited company to commit the offence. A limited company, therefore, cannot generally be tried for offences where mens rea is essential. Similarly, a company cannot face the punishment of imprisonment for obvious reasons that company cannot be sent to prison by way of a sentence. 24.The said decision pertains to the mensrea of the accused persons to defame the complainant. In the case on hand, the first accused knowing fully well instructed by written letter to print Ex.P1 phamplet. He himself wrote the conditions and instructed A6 to print the phamplet. Therefore, A1 and A6 had mensrea to defame the complainant and print Ex.P1. Further, A1 knowing fully well about the reason No.4, circulated the phamplet to all the Officers and also issued to all general public. Therefore, the above said judgment is not applicable to the present case and the conviction is liable to be confirmed. 25. In the light of the foregoing discussions, the conviction as against A1 and A6 is confirmed and the acquittal as against A2 to A5 is also confirmed. The complainant/appellant is not entitled for any compensation from A1 and A6. 26.In the result, the conviction and sentence made in C.C.118 of 2005 dated 30.10.2010 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate No.II, Ulundurpet is confirmed and C.A.No.82 of 2011 is dismissed. In view of C.A.No.82 of 2011 is dismissed, Crl.r.C.Nos.83 of 2011, 400 of 2011 and 858 of 2012 are also dismissed. 21.08.2018 Index:Yes Internet:Yes Arul To 1. The Principal Sessions Judge, Villupuram. 2.The Judicial Magistrate No.2, Ulundurpet. G.K.ILANTHIRAIYAN, J., Arul COMMON JUDGMENT IN CRL.A.No.82 of 2011 and Crl.R.C..Nos.83, 400 of 2011 and 858 of 2012 21.08.2018