Sunil Widge vs State Page No....1 Of 3 on 31 August, 2021 IN THE COURT OF SH. SONU AGNIHOTRI ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE­03, SOUTH EAST SAKET COURTS, NEW DELHI Criminal Revision No. 73/2018 CNR No. DLSE01­00745­2018 1. SUNIL WIDGE S/o Vipin Shekhar Widge R/o House No. E­26, Greater Kailash­II, New Delhi. Also At: H­1498, Second Floor, C. R. Park, New Delhi­110019. 2. LEENA KALRA W/o Sunil Widge R/o House No. E­26, Greater Kailash­II, New Delhi. Also At : H­1498, Second Floor, C. R. Park, New Delhi­110019. 3. RUCHIKA CHAWALA W/o Piyush Kumar R/o House No. S­226, Greater Kailash­II, New Delhi. .... Petitioners CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....1 of 30 VERSUS STATE .... Respondent Date of institution : 30.01.2018 Date of reserving the order : 31.08.2021 Date of pronouncement : 31.08.2021 JUDGMENT 1. This is criminal revision u/s 397 r/w Section 399 of the Code of the Criminal Procedure preferred by accused/petitioners against impugned order dated 09.11.2017 passed by court of Sh. Harun Pratap, Ld. MM South East, Delhi whereby order for framing of charge U/sec 323/341/34 IPC was passed against accused/petitioners in case FIR bearing No. 219/2015, PS Greater Kailash titled as State Vs. Sunil Widge & Others. 2. It is stated in the revision petition that present revision petition is preferred against impugned order dated 09.11.2017 CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....2 of 30 whereby Ld. Trial Court ordered for framing of charge and framed charge U/sec 323/341/34 IPC against petitioners. 3. Brief facts of the case as narrated in revision petition are that as per complaint dated 15.05.2015, complainant was reversing his car bearing No. DL­1YB­2655 when car bearing No. DL­3CCE­0965 hit his car from rear side. It is mentioned that petitioners slapped complainant, petitioner No. 1 punched complainant and threatened to burn his car and tore his uniform. It is mentioned that petitioner No. 1 broke side mirror of complainant's car and when petitioner No. 2 was about to hit complainant, petitioner No. 1 refrained petitioner No. 2 from doing so. 4. On the basis of complaint made by complainant, present FIR was lodged against petitioners. 5. Charge sheet was filed against petitioners U/sec 323/341/427/34 IPC whereupon Ld. Trial Court took cognizance of offences and proceeded further. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....3 of 30 6. On 09.11.2017, charge was framed against petitioners U/sec 323/341/34 IPC . 7. Following grounds have been taken by petitioners to challenge impugned order:­ a) Because order passed by Ld. Trial Court is wrong, improper, perverse, illegal and against basic provisions of law and law as laid down by Hon'ble Apex Court and Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. b) Because Ld. Trial Court did not pass speaking order as to on what basis /material found on record, he framed charges against petitioners vide impugned order. c) Because Ld. Trial Court passed order without appreciating facts of the case. d) Because Ld. Trial Court passed impugned order in a very casual and mechanical manner on basis of conjectures and surmises as he failed to specify incriminating material found on record on basis of which, he framed charge against petitioners. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....4 of 30 e) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to specify names of petitioners against whom charge U/sec 323/341/34 IPC was ordered to be framed. f) Because Ld. Trial Court without application of mind framed charge U/sec 323 IPC against petitioners as complainant was not even medically examined and there is no MLC on record for forming prima facie opinion as to whether complainant was hurt so as to frame charge against accused /petitioners U/sec 323 IPC . g) Because Ld. Trial Court while framing charge against petitioners U/sec 341 IPC failed to appreciate that eye witnesses Mr. Dharamvir Singh, Sunil, Ashok Mandal and Sanjay stated in their statements recorded U/sec 161 Cr. P. C that due to altercation, complainant went away from place of incident. Further, none of eye witnesses have stated in their respective statements that petitioners had obstructed complainant from going anywhere. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....5 of 30 h) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that complainant had ran away from the spot leaving his car behind on the road due to which traffic jam took place. Complainant was not obstructed by petitioners to proceed in any direction and rather petitioners were restrained by complainant as he left his car in locked condition in front of car of petitioners due to which petitioners were unable to proceed. i) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that not a single eye witness stated in their statements U/sec 161 Cr. P. C that petitioners had slapped or punched complainant as alleged in the FIR by complainant. Contrary to this, eye witnesses Satya Bhan, HC Shailesh, Sunil and Dharamvir have stated in their statements U/sec 161 Cr. P. C that complainant had slapped petitioner No. 1 and despite this, petitioner No. 1 was not medically examined. Further petitioner No. 2 was also hurt by complainant but she was also not taken to hospital for her medical examination by IO and that she herself went to Mool CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....6 of 30 Chand Hospital for treatment where she was medically examined. j) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that prosecution witnesses in their statements stated that one man and woman had hit complainant. k) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that it has been alleged in FIR that at the time of incident, petitioner No. 1 tore uniform of complainant, however, uniform /shirt of complainant was seized by IO only on 19.05.2015 i.e. four days after alleged incident and no reason as to why case property was not seized on the same day i.e. 15.05.2015 has been assigned. l) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that all public eye witnesses cited in the charge sheet are drivers by profession who have gave their statements in similar fashion. It is worth mentioning that neither in the complaint nor in the charge sheet, it has been mentioned that any public witness was present at the spot at the time of incident. It is further pertinent CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....7 of 30 to mention that place of incident is M Block Market, GK­I, however IO has not made any shopkeeper or any other public person as an eye witness and only drivers have been made eye witnesses which prima facie shows that these eye witnesses have been planted by IO in connivance with complainant as complainant is a driver by profession working with a Taxi Stand in GK­I. All this has been done to save Constable Brahmdutt who reached at the spot to help complainant without any reason. m) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that charge sheet is silent about the fact that how come above­mentioned eye witnesses /drivers were present at the spot at the time of incident nor did IO record their statements at the spot and it remains a mystery as to how IO got personal details /contact details of these eye witnesses and called all of them to PS on the same day i.e. 15.05.2015 to record their statements U/sec 161 Cr. P. C. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....8 of 30 n) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that DD No. 21 A was assigned to ASI Vijay Pal who was present at the spot to handle the call and what was interest of SI Braham Dutt to reach at place of incident and intervene. o) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that as per charge sheet, mirror of both sides and rear wiper of Innova Car of complainant was broken by petitioner No. 1 but that no mechanical inspection of complainant's car was got conducted to this effect nor any photograph has been placed on record to substantiate the said allegation. p) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that photographs filed with the charge sheet shows that Innova car of complainant is intact whereas car of petitioner No. 3 was damaged due to accident caused by complainant. From bare perusal of photographs, it is apparent that allegations leveled in the charge sheet against petitioners are false and cooked up by prosecution to save SI Braham Dutt who reached at the spot to CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....9 of 30 help complainant and assaulted petitioner No. 2. q) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that witnesses in their statements have stated that after complainant ran away from the spot, he returned to the spot after SI Braham Dutt reached at the spot. It is submitted that complainant and SI Braham Dutt are hand in glove with each other to falsely implicate petitioners in present false FIR to save the wrong doers. r) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that in first complaint filed by complainant, it has not been stated as to who called police at the spot of incident. s) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that no allegation against petitioner No. 3 has been made either in first complaint filed by complainant or in the entire charge sheet. t) Because Ld. Trial Court filed to appreciate that neither complainant nor witnesses or IO have stated that petitioner No. 3 was involved in present incident in any manner. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....10 of 30 u) Because Ld. Trial Court failed to appreciate that prima facie perusal of charge sheet shows that it has been made by IO in order to save his colleague SI Braham Dutt for his illegal act against petitioners against whom petitioners have filed criminal complaint wherein SI Braham Dutt has since been summoned by Ld. MM. 8. It is prayed to set aside impugned order dated 09.11.2017 and to discharge petitioners in present FIR. 9. I have heard arguments addressed by respective counsels and perused record including trial court record. 10. Ld. Senior Counsel for petitioners during course of arguments pointed towards complaint made by complainant wherein word "pakad kar" has been written in a narrow space. It was submitted by Senior counsel for petitioners that this word appears to have been added later on, somehow to make case come under purview of Section 341 IPC though despite that, alleged act of petitioners does not come within purview of CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....11 of 30 Section 341 IPC as it is nowhere stated in statement of complainant that he was trying to proceed in a particular direction when he was allegedly apprehended by petitioners. It was submitted that all the eye witnesses recorded by IO U/sec 161 Cr. P. C are drivers by profession and have been cited to help complainant who is a driver by profession. It was submitted that in fact, in garb of complainant, IO has tried to help SI Braham Dutt who intervened without getting DD No. 21 A for inquiry and against whom petitioners got lodged FIR No. 218/2015, PS GK and who got lodged FIR No. 217/2015, PS GK U/sec 186/353/332/506 IPC against petitioners herein. It was submitted that complainant in his complaint has taken name of all the three petitioners who allegedly bet him whereas eye witnesses in their statements U/sec 161 Cr. P. C have spoken about only one man and one woman. It was submitted that no other eye witness has taken name of petitioner Ruchika Chawala. It was submitted that no eye witness has stated that CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....12 of 30 complainant was restrained from proceeding in any direction in which he had right to proceed. It was submitted that no mechanical inspection of vehicle of complainant i.e. DL­1YB­ 2655 has been got done by IO nor any photographs showing any damage to side mirror and rear wiper has been filed by IO on record. It was submitted that no medical of complainant in support of allegations of prosecution case has been appended by IO on record which could have lent credence to prosecution story. 11. It was contended by Ld. Senior Counsel for petitioners that when no cognizable offence is made out at the time of registration of FIR but still police registers FIR and investigate and ultimately it is found that offence was non­cognizable, police could not have investigated offence without seeking permission from concerned Ld. Area MM under Section 155 (2) Cr.P.C. and in such a case if charge­sheet is filed, accused is liable to be discharged. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....13 of 30 12. Petitioners in support of their aforesaid contention filed judgments in cases titled as " Mam Chand Vs. State 1999 (78) DLT 2, S. Ajit Singh Vs. State 1989 RLR 392, Surinder Kumar Vs. State 1996 (64) DLT 620 and R. C. Sharma Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation Crl. Rev. P. No. 965/2003 decided on 27.07.2010". 13. Ld. Additional PP on the other hand submitted that even if no medical of complainant was got conducted, still offences under Section 323 / 341 / 34 IPC are made out against petitioners and impugned order is reasonable and in consonance with law. It was submitted that in statement of complainant, complainant has clearly stated that he was apprehended by petitioners and thus prima facie offence under Section 341 IPC has been committed by petitioners for which they are liable to be tried. It was submitted that judgments filed on behalf of petitioners are not applicable in facts and circumstances of present case. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....14 of 30 14. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled as " State by the Inspector of Police, Chennai Vs. S. Selvi and Another Criminal Appeal No. 2190 of 2017" discussed ratio of various judgments with regard to framing of charge in a criminal trial as below : "That the judge while considering the question of framing charge under Section 227 of the Code in Sessions cases (which is akin to Section 239 Cr. P. C pertaining to warrant cases ) has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been made out; where the material placed before the court disclose grave suspicion against the accused which has not been properly explained, the court will be fully justified in framing the charge; by and large if two views are equally possible and the judge is satisfied that the evidence produced before him while giving some rise to suspicion but not grave suspicion against the accused , he will CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....15 of 30 be fully within his rights to discharge the accused." 15. In case of Union of India Vs. Prafulla Kumar Samal and Another (1979) 3 SCC 4, it was held as below: "10. Thus, on a consideration of the authorities mentioned above, the following principles emerge: (1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited purposes of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been made out: (2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion against the accused which has not been properly explained the Court will be, fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding with the trial. (3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large however if CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....16 of 30 two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion against the accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused. (4) That in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which under the present Code is a senior and experienced Judge cannot act merely as a Post office or a mouth­piece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced before the Court, any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This however does not mean that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial." 16. Before appreciating contentions of Ld. Senior counsel for petitioners with regard to the fact that whether or not offence under Section 341 IPC appears to have been committed by CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....17 of 30 petitioners, it is necessary to understand ingredients of Section 339 IPC which defines offence of wrongful restraint which is punishable under Section 341 IPC. Section 339 IPC provides as below: 17. "339. Wrongful restraint - Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to restrain that person." 18. In this case, complainant in his statement on basis of which FIR in present case was lodged has stated in unequivocal terms that all the petitioners slapped him after apprehending him. In facts of present case when complainant was being beaten, it can not be said that merely because complainant did not state that he wanted to run away in a particular or for that matter to any direction in order to escape from beatings of petitioners, complainant did not want to proceed in a direction so as to save himself. It is but natural for a person to make efforts to escape when he is being beaten. So merely because complainant did not state that he was intending to go to a particular direction in order to save himself, it does not imply that he did not. So this CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....18 of 30 contention of petitioners is not tenable. 19. Ld. Senior counsel for petitioners alternatively argued that it can not be said that complainant was allegedly obstructed by petitioners from proceeding in a particular direction as eyewitnesses have stated complainant was able to get away from spot and then again returned to spot. To my mind, obstruction even for a moment is sufficient to constitute offence under Section 339 IPC punishable under Section 341 IPC. So even if complainant was able to get free himself and leave the spot but he was held captive by petitioners even for a moment for the purpose of beating, prima facie offence of wrongful restraint can be said to have been committed by petitioners. 20. Ld. Senior counsel for petitioners further contended that eyewitnesses took names of only two petitioners whereas as per complainant, all the three petitioners bet complainant. It was submitted that two version regarding incident are coming in charge-sheet and so in view of the same prosecution story cannot be believed and hence petitioners are liable to be discharged. Perusal of statements of eyewitnesses show that every witness has CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....19 of 30 stated that there was lot of jam due to the accident. In jam, what one was able to perceive and listen will depend on position of a person where he is standing and how much he is able to see. So, to discard prosecution version at this stage because of two emanating versions will not be a correct approach and let all these aspects be clear during course of evidence. Hence, this contention of petitioners is rejected. 21. Here, I will like to deal with other legal contention of petitioners that as no offence under Section 341 IPC was made out in present case, investigation done by police for offence under Section 323 IPC is bad for want of permission from Magistrate under Section 155 (2) Cr. P.C and petitioners are liable to be discharged for commission of offence under Section 323 IPC. 22. Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in case titled as " Vijay Kumar Wadhawan vs State Govt Of Nct Of Delhi & Anr. Decided on 1 October, 2015 CRL.M.C. 4966/2014 & Crl. M.A. 17011/2014" held as below: "14. The short argument addressed before this Court is that charge sheet in this case had admittedly been filed under Sections 323 / 341 IPC, CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....20 of 30 i.e., for both a cognizable and a non-cognizable offence; the petitioner had, however, been discharged for the cognizable offence, i.e., for the offence under Section 341 IPC and notice had been framed against him only for a non-cognizable offence, i.e., for the offence under Section 323 IPC; the procedure as mandated under Section 155 Cr.P.C., i.e., prior permission not having been taken by the Investigating Officer to investigate a non- cognizable offence, the trial in pursuance of such a charge sheet stands vitiated and the proceedings are liable to be quashed. 15. Before proceedings further, it would be relevant to look into the provisions contained in Section 190 (1) Cr.P.C., which deals with cognizance of offences by the Magistrate. The same reads as under:- "190. Cognizance of offence by Magistrate- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, and any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf under sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence- (a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such offence; (b) upon a police report of such facts; (c) upon information received from any person other than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such offence has been committed..." 16. Thus, cognizance can be taken by the Magistrate upon (a) receipt of a complaint disclosing facts constituting commission of an offence (b) upon a police report disclosing such facts or (c) on his own knowledge. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....21 of 30 17. A bare perusal of Clause (b) above, would show that the Magistrate can take cognizance of any offence, irrespective of whether it is a cognizable offence or a non-cognizable offence, upon a police report disclosing such facts as would constitute commission of an offence. The foundation of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate for taking cognizance of an offence does not depend upon the validity or otherwise of an investigation carried out by the police. It depends only upon the set of facts and circumstances placed before the Court, from which the Court comes to a conclusion that they constitute commission of an offence. It would, therefore, not be correct to say that cognizance of an invalid police report is prohibited necessarily in law and is, therefore, a nullity. 18. In H.N. Rishbud and Inder Singh Vs. The State of Delhi , AIR 1955 SC 196, the Full Bench of the Supreme Court inter-alia observed as under: "11. ................................A defect or illegality in investigation, however serious, has no direct bearing on the competence or the procedure relating to cognizance or trial. No doubt a police report which results from an investigation is provided in Section 190 Cr. P. C. as the material on which cognizance is taken. But it cannot be maintained that a valid and legal police report is the foundation of the jurisdiction of the Court to take cognizance... .............. While no doubt, in one sense, Clauses (a), (b) and CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....22 of 30 (c) of Section 190 (1) are conditions requisite for taking of cognizance, it is not possible to say that cognizance on an invalid police report is prohibited and is therefore a nullity. Such an invalid report may still fall either under Clause (a) or (b) of Section 190 (1) , (whether it is the one or the other we need not pause to consider) and in any case cognizance so taken is only in the nature of error in a proceeding antecedent to the trial... 12..................If, therefore, cognizance is in fact taken, on a police report vitiated by the breach of a mandatory provision relating to investigation, there can be no doubt that the result of the trial which follows it cannot be set aside unless the illegality in the investigation can be shown to have brought about a miscarriage of justice..." 19. Therefore, even if investigation was invalid for want of order of the Magistrate under Section 155 (2) Cr.P.C., the police report based upon such an investigation is not nullified and does not become non est merely on account of this procedural lapse in the investigation and it is very much permissible for the Court to take cognizance even of a non- cognizable offence, on the basis of the evidence collected during such an investigation, unless some prejudice is shown to have been caused to the accused for want of requisite order under Section 155 (2) of the Code. 20. Assuming that provisions of Section 155 (2) Cr.P.C. are mandatory and the police report based upon facts discovered during such an investigation cannot form the basis for taking cognizance under Section CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....23 of 30 190 (1) (b) Cr.P.C., a cognizance can still be taken, on the basis of such a report, under Section 190 (1) (a) Cr.P.C. 21. 'Complaint' has been defined in Section 2 (d) Cr.P.C. as under:- "2(d) "complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate, which a view to his taking action under this Code, that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report. Explanation-A report made by a police officer in a case which discloses after investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant." 22. Definition of 'complaint' given in the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1898, did not include the above referred explanation. The purpose of adding the explanation in the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973, was to make it possible for the Court to take cognizance of a non-cognizable offence even on the basis of a police report, by treating it as a complaint. If the report made by a police officer is to be treated as a complaint, it is immaterial whether the investigation was carried out on receipt of information disclosing commission of cognizable as well as non- cognizable offence and during the course of investigation, commission of only a non-cognizable offence was found or it was carried out on the basis of complaint which disclosed commission only of a non-cognizable CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....24 of 30 offence and was conducted without obtaining requisite orders from the Magistrate under Section 155 (2) of the Code. 23. Section 190 (1) Cr.P.C. does not say as to who can make complaint. The complaint can be oral and need not necessarily be in writing. It is also not necessary that the complaint should be made only by the victim of the crime. Since the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence, the proceedings on taking cognizance would be initiated even though the persons who had committed the offence were not known at that time. The complainant can also be a public servant. The police officer, who is a public servant, is competent to make a complaint and there is nothing in law which prevents a Court from taking cognizance on a complaint made by a police officer, if it discloses the commission of an offence. There is no provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure , which prevents a Magistrate from taking an invalid police report into consideration and taking cognizance on the basis of the facts disclosed in such a report. In fact, even before enactment of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973, it was held in a number of decisions including A. Kanniah and Ors. Vs. State, AIR 1967 Madras 390, Kantilal Takhatmal Jain and Anr. Vs. State of Maharastra, AIR 1970 Bombay 225 and Public Prosecutor Vs. A.V. Ramiah‟ 1958 Cr.L.J. 737, that where a police officer carries investigation into a non-cognizable offence without the order of the Magistrate and files a charge sheet, such a charge sheet can be treated as a complaint. The judicial pronouncement has been given statutory recognition by adding the explanation to the definition of complaint in the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973. CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....25 of 30 24. Moreover, the explanation attached to this Section clearly pre- supposes a situation that where initially a charge sheet has been filed for both a cognizable as also a non-cognizable offence and thereafter the proceedings in the cognizable offence are dropped, the same shall be deemed to be treated as a complaint and the police officer by whom such a report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant. This is clearly so in the instant case. Proceedings for the cognizable offence having been dropped/discharged, the charge sheet has to be treated as a complaint under Section 2 (d) Cr. P. C and the police officer who has filed the charge sheet has to be treated as the complainant. It was on this complaint that cognizance under Section 323 IPC had been taken which the Magistrate was empowered to do so under Section 190 (1) (a) Cr. P. C. 25. Sub-clause (4) of Section 155 Cr.P.C. inter alia reads as follows: "(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable, the case shall be deemed to be a cognizable, notwithstanding that the other offences are non-cognizable. The bar of Section 155 (2) of the Code is not attracted." 26. Under Section 460 Cr.P.C., there are certain category of irregularities which do not vitiate the proceedings, i.e., those proceedings which are erroneously done but in good faith. Such proceedings are not liable to be set aside on the ground that the Magistrate was not empowered to do so and clause (e) of Section 460 Cr.P.C. includes the power as under:- CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....26 of 30 " (e) To take cognizance of an offence under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub section (1) of Section 190 ." The aforestated legislative provisions clearly answer the queries of the petitioner. 27. Similar view was taken in Chaman Prakash Vs. State , 2007 (3) JCC 1983, wherein the Coordinate Bench of this Court held as under:- "8. I am not persuaded to accept the line of reasoning in the cases cited on behalf of the petitioner. Undoubtedly there are certain observations in those cases suggestive of the entire investigation being vitiated if the court discovering, at a later stage that no cognizable offence is made out. However each case had to be decided on the facts and attendant circumstances. In this case the court in the first instance did not accept the submission that only a non-cognizable offence was made out. Further Section 460 (2) lists out irregularities which vitiate the proceedings. A reading of this would show that if the Magistrate proceeds to make an order to investigate the offence, under Section 155 into the incident which may turn out to be one involving a non- cognizable offence, that does not by itself vitiate the proceedings. This is further strengthened by 155 (4), which provides that if two offences, one non- cognizable, and the other cognizable, are alleged, the case shall be deemed to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences are non- cognizable. Such being the situation investigation and further proceedings in respect of an FIR, where eventually only non-cognizable offences can be pressed, would not vitiate the entire proceedings. There CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....27 of 30 is no taint of illegality attached to the investigation. This aspect was not discussed in the judgments cited; they did not consider the impact and effect of Section 460 , or Section 155 (4) ." 23. So in view of law laid down in Vijay Kumar Wadhawan case(Supra), even legally, contentions of Ld. Senior counsel for petitioners is not tenable and judgments filed not applicable and hence rejected. 24. It was contended on behalf of petitioners that no medical of complainant has been got done by IO and so it cannot be said as to whether any injury was caused to complainant and thus petitioners are liable to be discharged for commission of offence under Section 323 IPC. It is well settled that production of an injury report is not a sine qua non for establishing case for offence under Section 323 IPC. Section 323 IPC is a punishment Section for voluntarily causing Hurt. Hurt is defined under Section 319 IPC. As per Section 319 IPC, whoever causes bodily pain, disease or infirmity to any person is said to cause Hurt. Therefore, even causing bodily pain can be said to be causing hurt. By slapping and beating complainant by petitioners at this stage, it cannot be said that complainant did not suffer bodily pain. So, this contention of petitioners is also rejected. 25. So far as contention of petitioners to the effect that photographs filed with the charge-sheet shows that car of complainant is intact, I am of the view that IO in seizure memo has mentioned taking CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....28 of 30 into possession 05 photographs whereas as per list of documents filed with the charge-sheet, checking by Ahlmad shows that only three photographs have been filed by IO. It is for IO to explain during course of trial regarding remaining two photographs which may show damage on vehicle of complainant but at this stage it is difficult to comment on the same with certainty and it will be during course of trial that picture will become clear. At this stage, this contention of petitioners is therefore rejected. 26. With regard to contention of petitioners qua non handing over torn dress by complainant to IO on the day of incident is concerned, perusal of charge-sheet shows that IO has recorded supplementary statement of complainant in this regard dated 15.05.2015 wherein complainant has stated that he did not have another set of clothes at that point of time and therefore, he will give his torn dress to IO later on which gives a plausible explanation in this regard. Hence, this contention of petitioners is not tenable and hence rejected. 27. With regard to contention of petitioners that all the eyewitnesses cited by IO are drivers, perusal of charge-sheet shows that one witness is a rehriwala and rest are drivers but at this stage, witnesses having same profession as that of complainant is immaterial and course of trial would establish veracity of witnesses cited by IO. Hence, this contention of petitioners is not tenable and hence rejected. 28. With regard to other contentions of petitioners qua damage to car of complainant are concerned, I don't deem it necessary to give CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....29 of 30 any finding on the same as petitioners have been discharged for offence under 427/34 IPC . 29. With regard to contention of petitioners qua reaching of SI Braham Dutt on spot, despite DD No. 21 A not being assigned to him for inquiry, I am of the view that this contention of petitioners is not tenable as firstly posting of SI Braham Dutt as per his statement under Section 161 Cr. P. C was in GK and secondly, answer has been given by SI Braham Dutt in his statement that on seeing traffic jam, he in capacity of a police officer went to spot which infact is part of his duties as per provisions of Delhi Police Act . 30. In view of my above made discussion, I am of the view that petition filed by petitioners is without merits and is accordingly dismissed. Impugned order passed by Ld. Trial Court though cannot be said to be well reasoned order but conclusion arrived at can not be faulted with because of my discussion in this judgment. 31. Let copy of this judgment be sent to Ld. Trial Court alongwith TCR. Dictated and Announced (Sonu Agnihotri) in the open court through VC ASJ­03 (South­East), on 31.08.2021 Saket Courts, Delhi CR No. 73/2018 Sunil Widge & Ors Vs. State Page no....30 of 30