Smt. Madamma vs K. Kadirvel on 25 February, 2017 IN THE COURT OF THE 44TH ADDL.CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE, BENGALURU Dated: This the 25th day of FEBRUARY 2017 :Present: Smt. Mala N.D., B.A.L., LL.B., 44th ACMM, Bengaluru C.C.No.18553/2012 Complainant : Smt. Madamma, W/o Late Dharmalingam, Aged about 50 years, R/at No.15, 15th Main, 2nd Phase, Madeshwara Nagar, B.T.M. Layout, Bengaluru. (By Sri. M.R. Nanjunda Gowda, advocate ) -V/s- Accused : K. Kadirvel, S/o Kannaian, Aged about 38 years, Revenue Land, Vysya Bank Colony, J.P. Nagar I Phase, Bengaluru. (By Sri. A.N. Radha Krishna, Advocate ) 2 C.C.No.18553/2012 JUDGMENT This case has arisen out of a private complaint filed by one Smt. Madamma against accused for the offence punishable U/s.500 of IPC . 2. The complaint averments reads thus: Complainant Smt. Madamma belongs to a respectable family residing at Mahadeshwara Nagara, BTM Layout, Bengaluru, having married with one Dharamlingam of Motthipalli village, Tamil Nadu, about 30 years back, and has two children out of their wedlock. The husband of the complainant was a very good civil contractor, he was having good reputation in the society and died on 13/08/1989 leaving behind the complainant and her children. Since from the date of death of her husband, complainant being a helpless widow brought up her two sons, among them, first son is one D. Srinivas, studied up to PUC, married with one Smt. Joshila and is working as Asst. Restaurant Manager at "Papa Johns". Similarly, second son Ramachandra, completed his graduation in B.com by securing 78% and working as a senior tax analyst at "ERNST AND YOUNG", multinational company with handsome salary. All the family 3 C.C.No.18553/2012 members of the complainant are maintaining commendable respect in the locality and also at their respective working places. When things stood thus, in the first week of October 2009, the accused being a known person, had approached the complainant for loan of Rs.3 lakhs. Accordingly, on 15/10/2009 accused availed loan of Rs.3 lakhs from the complainant with a promise to repay the said amount within 20/02/2010, became defaulter, when the same was demanded, accused had issued a cheque in favour of complainant for Rs.3 lakhs which was dishonored with an endorsement of "Account Closed". As such, complainant issued legal notice through her counsel on 04/05/2010, for which accused gave evasive reply notice through his counsel on 07/05/2010, by alleging at second line of para No.2, that, "my client has hearsay that, your client is the kept mistress of one Sri. N. Subramani and he is none other than the neighbour and predecessor in title of my client" and again at 4th line of para No.3 of the reply notice, it is stated that, "since it is heard by my client that, she is the kept mistress of N. Subramani she might have seen my client from past two decades" and thereafter accused distributed the copy of 4 C.C.No.18553/2012 the said notice in local area and neighbouring area with an intention to defame the complainant. On account of these imputations by the accused, complainant used to get phone calls by many persons expressing their regrets about the allegations made by the accused which has consequently lowered the reputation of complainant in general public. Accused had made such allegations with an oblique motive of deterring the complainant from proceeding further in the cases filed by the complainant against him in connection with the aforesaid loan transaction. Therefore, C.W.1 Smt. Madamma filed this private complaint under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. before this court. After recording the sworn statement and perusal of supportive documents this court having taken the cognizance, registered the case against accused on 24/08/2012 for the offence punishable under Section 500 of IPC. 3. Upon issuance of court summons, accused has appeared before this court through his counsel and has obtained bail. 4. The copies of complaint and annexed documents have been furnished to the accused as required under Sec.207 of Cr.P.C. The 5 C.C.No.18553/2012 cognizance of the offence punishable U/sec. 500 of IPC has been taken as per Sec.190 of Cr.P.C. 5. Plea of the accused is recorded, the substance of accusations has been read over and explained to the accused in the language known to him, he pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. Hence, the complainant is called upon to prove her case. 6. The complainant in order to prove her case, examined herself as P.W. 1 and another witness one Smt. Rajamma as P.W. 2 and got marked 5 documents at Ex.P.1 to P.5. 7. After completion of complainant's evidence, the statement of accused as required under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. has been recorded, wherein he has denied the incriminating evidence adduced against him and has not chosen to lead his side defense evidence. Hence, the case is posted for arguments. 8. Heard both the side and perused the material evidence on record. 9. The following points would arise for my consideration: 1. Whether the prosecution proves beyond reasonable doubt that, complainant who is a respectable woman having a commendable respect in the locality, lent loan 6 C.C.No.18553/2012 of Rs.3 lakhs to the accused on his request, which was agreed to be paid on or before 20/02/2010, accused became defaulter, issued cheque which resulted in its dishonour, as such legal notice was issued calling him to make payment as aforesaid for which accused having issued a reply notice through his counsel on 07/05/2010, made two defamatory statements about the complainant in the reply notice by stating that "my client has hearsay that, your client is the kept mistress of one Sri. N. Subramani and he is none other than the neighbour and predecessor in title of my client" and again at 4th line of para No.3 of the reply notice, it is stated that, "since it is heard by my client that, she is the kept mistress of N. Subramani she might have seen my client from past two decades" and thereafter accused distributed the copy of the said notice in local area and neighbouring area with an intention to defame the complainant. On account of these imputations by the accused, complainant used to get phone calls by many persons expressing their regrets about the allegations made by the accused which has consequently lowered the reputation of complainant in general public and thereby accused defamed the complainant and committed an offence punishable U/s.500 of IPC ? 2. What Order? 10.My findings on the above points are as follows: Point No.1 : IN THE AFFIRMATIVE Point No.2: As per final order for the following 7 C.C.No.18553/2012 REASONS 11.Point No.1: This is a private complaint filed by one Smt. Madamma on the allegation of defamation that accused having borrowed hand loan of Rs. 3 lakhs, became defaulter, issued cheque in favour of the complainant which came to be dishonored for the reason 'account closed', as such, complainant issued a legal notice for which accused issued a reply notice to her legal notice by stating some defamatory statements to the effect that, the complainant is the kept mistress of one Sri. Subramani, which became the root cause for this complaint. The complainant Smt. Madamma though cited two witnesses, has examined one Smt. Rajamma who is said to be her neighbour. 12. It is the specific allegation against accused that, accused being a defaulter of loan amount in order to deter the complainant from proceeding in the private complaint, which is filed in connection with the dishonour of the cheque issued by him, sent a reply notice to her legal notice by stating, at second line of para No.2, it is stated that, "my client has hearsay that, your client is the kept mistress of one Sri. N. Subramani and he is none other than 8 C.C.No.18553/2012 the neighbour and predecessor in title of my client" and again at 4th line of para No.3 of the reply notice, it is stated that, "since it is heard by my client that, she is the kept mistress of N. Subramani she might have seen my client from past two decades". In addition to that, it is also alleged that, after issuance of the reply notice as stated above, the accused has distributed the copy of the said notice in local area and neighbouring area with an intention to defame the complainant. 13. Before discussing the oral and documentary evidence, it is necessary to know Section 499 of IPC which reads defamation thus:- "Defamation:- Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person". 14. In this connection, the complainant has furnished a certified copy of the legal notice issued through her counsel on 04/05/2010 which discloses about the loan transaction and also 9 C.C.No.18553/2012 dishonor of the cheque which was alleged to have been issued by the accused on 01/03/2010 and came to be dishonored on 16/04/2010 for the reason of 'account closed', wherein complainant had called upon the accused to make payment of the aforesaid loan amount which can be seen at Ex.P.1. A certified copy of the private complaint i.e. Ex.P.2 which is renumbered as C.C. No.50425/2010 before 13th ACMM, which reveals that, complainant had filed a private complaint against accused for the offence punishable under Section 138 of N.I. Act. Similarly, a certified copy of the cheque said to have been issued by the accused in favour of the complainant Smt. Madamma is also furnished and is exhibited as Ex.P.3. The complainant has marked the reply notice dated 07/05/2010 at Ex.P.4 on which the entire case of the complainant is revolving. 15. On perusal of Ex.P.2, a certified copy of cheque, it is observed that, it is issued in favour of complainant Smt. Madamma by the accused Kadrivel. The production of copy of complaint reveals about the criminal action initiated against accused for the offence punishable under Section 138 of N.I. Act. The issuance of legal notice by the complainant as well as issuance of reply notice by the 10 C.C.No.18553/2012 accused is not in dispute. On going through the contents of reply notice which is marked as Ex.P.4, at second line of para No.2 and at 4th line of para No.3 as stated above, some defamatory imputed sentences can be seen. 16. With this background, it would be proper to discuss the evidence adduced before the this court. The complainant Smt. Madamma in her evidence has deposed that, accused is a known person since 20 years through his mother and further she goes on deposing about the background of her family status by saying that, herself and children has a commendable respect in the family as well as in the society. The entire evidence of the complainant reveals that, she has lent loan of Rs.3 lakhs to the accused for which, she was issued with a cheque belonging to ICICI bank, Jayanagar Branch. Thereafter, she has clearly stated that, the cheque issued by the accused came to be dishonored for the reason of 'account closed', as such, she has issued legal notice for which, accused has given a reply notice wherein there was some defamatory statements against this complainant by the accused to the effect that, she has illicit relationship with one Sri. Subramani. It is also further stated 11 C.C.No.18553/2012 that, accused has distributed the copies of the said reply notice to her neighbours in her locality which lowered her prestige and dignity in the society, which made her to suffer insult as many persons used to ask her about this fact. Nothing substantial has been elicited in the cross-examination of complainant by the accused side. 17. It can be noticed that, complainant is an illiterate woman not knowing to read and write. She has clearly asserted that, she came to know abut the defamatory statements which are crepted in the reply notice only through her counsel. It is also stated that, her counsel has read over the contents of the reply notice to her. Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the accused that, complainant has not suffered any imputation as her counsel has not questioned her about this fact after reading the contents of reply notice cannot be considered, as the contents of the reply notice itself are in the form of defamatory. 18. It can be noticed that, it is stated in the reply notice that, accused Kadrivelu as an hearsay to the fact that, the complainant has an illicit affair with one Subramni who happens to be his neighbour and there are chances of seeing him from past two 12 C.C.No.18553/2012 decades. These two statements which are carved in the reply notice reveals that the accused has no first hand information about the fact which was mentioned in the notice. Under the circumstances, without having any reliable and credible information about any facts, it would not be proper to make any allegation against any person which might affect their personal life in the society. 19. Further, this complainant has stick on to her version to the effect that, accused has distributed the copies of the reply notice in her house surroundings with an intention to defame her character. This is supported by the evidence of another witness Smt. Rajamma who has clearly stated that, the accused has sent reply notice which contained defamatory statement which made the complainant to suffer mental agony in the general public and also in front of her family members. 20. The contents of complaint as well as the entire evidence of complainant are corroborating with each other, wherein she has deposed to the effect that, after receiving of the reply notice by the accused, she has suffered mental agony and insult in front of her children, daughter-in-laws as well as in front of her neighbours. 13 C.C.No.18553/2012 21. Similar facts have been narrated by the another witness Smt. Rajamma. She has clearly stated that, she was aware of the loan transaction as well as the reply notice issued by the accused. This witness also asserted that, accused has distributed the copies of reply notice in and around the complainant's house. The entire cross- examination of the accused counsel stick on to education of both the complainant as well as this witness. Both of them have clearly stated that, they are uneducated and they do not know reading and writing. 22. It is to be observed that, the contents of complaint as well as the evidence of both the witnesses discloses that, accused has distributed the copies of reply notice to the neighbour with an intention to tarnish the image of the complainant. On the contrary, the learned counsel for the accused poses the question to the witness by saying that, the accused has not pasted any copies of reply notice on the public walls which is not at all the case of the complainant. 23. Further, it is not the defense of the accused that, he has not issued any reply notice to the complainant. Per contra the counsel for the accused goes on posing a question by saying that, 14 C.C.No.18553/2012 the reply notice does not contain the signature of the accused. It is a general principle that, the reply notice issued by an advocate need not bear the signature of the parties as the said reply notice will be sent through the letter head of the concerned counsel under the instructions of accused and it is also not the case of the accused that, without his instructions and knowledge his counsel has sent such a reply notice to the complainant. Under the circumstances, mere denial of issuance of reply notice will not shake the case of the complainant. 24. In addition, the documents available before this court which are marked at Ex.P.1 to P.4. discloses the criminal actions initiated against accused in respect of the loan transaction. The cheque available before this court issued in favour of the complainant by the accused herein, legal notice of the complainant discloses that, she has called upon the accused to make payment or else to face the legal consequences. As such, the reply notice which is the prime document to consider the case of the complainant in respect of the alleged defamatory statement shows the intention of accused which 15 C.C.No.18553/2012 might be an attempt to deter the complainant from proceeding in cheque bounce cases. 25. On going through the contents of reply notice, it can be noticed that, there is a prima facie allegations against the complainant without ascertaining the actual facts and without having personal information about the alleged illegal relationship of complainant said to have been with one Sri. Subramani. When such being the case, accused has no right to tarnish the image of a woman who is a helpless widow, who had lost her husband at her tender age with two small children. The other information with regard to the family background of the complainant and also up bringing of her children and making them to settle in their life are all not disputed facts. Therefore, in the normal circumstances, the statements which are forth coming in the reply notice appears to be defamatory, which has resulted in damaging the reputation of the complainant in front of her family members as well as in the society. As such, the act of accused comes within the purview of defamation under Section 499 of IPC. 16 C.C.No.18553/2012 26. Similarly, this court has no reason to disbelieve the version of the complainant and also the witness about distributing the copies of the reply notice by the accused, as their evidence is also corroborating with each other and not discredited by the accused. 27. In addition to these, the learned counsel for the complainant has relied on two decisions which are reported in 2001 Crl.L.J.2571, between M.N. Damani Vs. S.K. Sinha and others , wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has "rejected the quashing of the complaint on the ground that, there was a clear document about the imputation intending to harm knowing or having reason to believe that, such imputations will harm the reputation of the complainant". 28. Similarly, in Crl. Petition No.2874/2008 between M.P. Nellakantaiah, Vs. H. Puttaiah , our Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka has taken the same view that, "the written statement prima faciely appears to be defamatory. Hence, trial need to be conducted". 29. In this case, document in question is a reply notice which is a public document and it is not the case of the accused that, his 17 C.C.No.18553/2012 counsel has not issued such notice without his instructions or knowledge. Therefore, the arguments of the learned counsel for the accused that, aforesaid two citations are not applicable, as those mattes were considered before commencement of trial cannot be accepted for the reason that any observations made in the decisions are always binding on the trial court. As such, since the document which is in dispute contains the defamatory statements which has made the complainant to suffer mentally in front of her family members as well as in the society is an un-excusable facts for which accused has to be taught a lesson. 30. In the general parlance of Indian Society, the character of a woman plays a vital role through out her life. Under the circumstances, without having any reliable information, smudging of her character which has made her to fight for it since six years to establish the fact that, she is of a good character and she has no any such illegal relationship as alleged by the accused. Facing this kind of situation by a helpless woman in front of her family members as well as in the society and her mental suffering cannot be measured in terms of any other facts, as a matter of protest, the 18 C.C.No.18553/2012 complainant has to be compensated monetarily despite the fact that monetary relief cannot be equated to the damages that has caused by the accused and the days of her mental agony cannot be returned back. 31. Therefore, from the available materials and the documentary evidence, it can be said that, the complainant has satisfactorily established her case with cogent, convincing and corroborative evidence. As such, the accused is a guilty minded person and deserved to be punished for his acts and at the same time, the complainant has to be compensated monetarily for her mental sufferings which she has undergone in all these years. Therefore, above point No.1 is answered in the Affirmative. 32.Point No.2: In view of the affirmative findings on the above point No.1, I proceed to pass the following:- ORDER Acting U/s.255(2) of Cr.P.C ., the accused is found guilty, convicted for the offence punishable under Section 500 of IPC. Accused shall under go Simple Imprisonment for a period of 6 months and shall pay a fine of Rs.15,000/-, in default of payment of fine, accused shall further under go simple imprisonment of two months. 19 C.C.No.18553/2012 Further on recovery of the fine amount, Rs.10,000/- shall be paid to the complainant as compensation. Office is directed to forth with furnish free copy of this judgment to the accused. (Dictated to the Stenographer through computer and after corrections made by me and then pronounced by me in the Open Court on this the 25th day of February 2017). (Mala N.D) XLIV Addl.C.M.M., B'lore. ANNEXURE 1. LIST OF THE WITNESS EXAMINED FOR THE PROSECUTION P.W. 1: Smt. Madamma P.W. 2: Smt. Rajamma 2. LIST OF THE DOCUMENTS MARKED FOR THE PROSECUTION Ex.P.1: Legal notice sent to accused Ex.P.2: Certified copy of the private complaint Ex.P.3: Certified copy of the cheque Ex.P.4: Copy of reply notice 3. LIST OF THE WITNESS EXAMINED AND DOCUMENTS MARKED FOR THE DEFENCE NIL 4. LIST OF THE METERIAL OBJECTS MARKED FOR THE PROSECUTION NIL (Mala N.D) XLIV Addl.C.M.M., B'lore. 20 C.C.No.18553/2012 Judgment pronounced in Open Court vide separate:- ORDER Acting U/s.255(2) of Cr.P.C ., the accused is found guilty, convicted for the offence punishable under Section 500 of IPC. Accused shall under go Simple Imprisonment for a period of 6 months and shall pay a fine of Rs.15,000/-, in default of payment of fine, accused shall further under go simple imprisonment of two months. Further on recovery of the fine amount, Rs.10,000/- shall be paid to the complainant as compensation. Office is directed to forth with furnish free copy of this judgment to the accused. (Mala N.D) XLIV Addl.C.M.M., B'lore. 21 C.C.No.18553/2012 At this stage, learned counsel for accused filed an application under Section 389 of Cr.P.C. seeking suspension of sentence passed by this court. Perused, wherein accused is intending to prefer an appeal against conviction and judgment of this court. Therefore, it would be just and proper to provide an opportunity to accused to prefer an appeal in the interest of justice. Hence, same is allowed and conviction and judgment of this court is suspended till expiry of the appeal period. At this stage one Sri. Chandramouli s/o Chowdaiah is present, offered surety on behalf of accused, accordingly filed surety affidavit, RTC pertaining to Sy.No.54/1, measuring 4 acres, situated at Bommasandra, Challakere Taluk along with Xerox copy of Adhaar Card. (Original is shown before me.) Perused and surety is accepted. Office is directed to take surety PB bond of Rs.20,000/-. (Mala N.D) XLIV Addl.C.M.M., B'lore. 22 C.C.No.18553/2012