State vs . Mohd. Ashu on 31 May, 2012 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu IN THE COURT OF MS VANDANA JAIN, M.M., MAHILA COURT (EAST), KARKARDOOMA COURTS, DELHI. FIR NO.: 854/07 P.S.: Shakarpur U/Sec. 354 IPC STATE VS. MOHD. ASHU JUDGMENT: 1. Date of commission of : 21.11.2007 offence 2. Name of complainant : Kumari Nagma, D/o Sh. Babu Khan R/o E-3/8, Jhuggi Mazaar of Peer Baba Ramesh Park, Laxmi Nagar, Delhi 3. Name of the accused, his : Mohd. Ashu parentage and address S/o Mohd. Ashi R/o E-3/8, Jhuggi Mazaar of Peer Baba Ramesh Park, Laxmi Nagar, Delhi 4.Offence complained of : u/s 354 IPC 5. The date of order : 31.5.2012 6. Plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty Reserved for judgment : 17.5.2012 Date of judgment : 31.5.2012 BRIEF REASONS FOR THE DECISION: 1. In this case accused faced trial on the allegations that on 21.11.2007 at about 02:00 pm at DDA Park in front of Lalita Park, Laxmi Nagar, he along with one associate (since not arrested) after wrongfully restraining the complainant namely Nagma voluntarily caused hurt to her by slapping and kicking and assaulted and used criminal force against her with an intention to outrage her modesty and thereby committed offences punishable u/s 323 / 341 / 354 IPC. 2. After completion of investigation, IO filed the charge sheet before this court on 02.08.2008 upon which the cognizance was 1 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu taken and accused was summoned. Vide order dated 13.8.2009 notice for the offence punishable u/s 354 IPC and on 30.3.2011 notice for the offence punishable u/s 323 / 341 was framed against the accused to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 3. In order to prove its case, prosecution cited as many as 5 witnesses namely Ms. Nagma, Shri Sonu Khan, HC Ashok Kumar, ASI Ezaz Ahmed and Ct. Jitender who appeared as PW1 to PW5 respectively. 4. PW1 Ms. Nagma, complainant in her examination in chief deposed that she does not remember the month and year but it was 9th of the fateful day. She deposed that during that period she was employed in the Export Office at Lalita Park, Laxmi Nagar and there she used to do packaging work and used used to reside at the house of accused Ashu correctly identified the accused in the court. She further deposed that she had taken the said space on rent from the mother of accused Ashu. She further deposed that on that day, she had come to take lunch at her tenanted place and after taking lunch when she was going back to the office, accused Ashu intercepted her in gali no. 9 near the export office and asked her to get him introduced to one Pooja but when she refused by saying that she does not know any Pooja, accused Ashu slapped, kicked her and pulled her. She further deposed that one another boy whose name she does not know but she can identify him was present with accused Ashu and both of them pulled her by catching hold of 2 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu her arms and when she raised alarm they left her and ran away and she fell down on the road and while running away Ashu extended threat to kill her that in case she goes to home and tell the incident to her parents and all this was done after restraining her on the road. She further deposed that she started weeping and after going to home she told all this to her brother Sonu and when her mother came to know about this she complained about the said act of accused Ashu to his father (who was under the influence of liquor) but he did not pay heed to it. She further deposed that she suffered the bruises on her cheeks. She further deposed that thereafter, she went to police station along with her brother and mother and lodged the complaint at PS Shakar Pur and the said complaint is Ex. PW1/A. She further deposed that she has shown the police the place of incident and after lodging of her complaint, Ashu and his mother and his sisters came to beat her but she saved herself by latching the door from inside. She further deposed that she got arrested the accused Ashu vide Ex. PW1/B bearing her signatures at point A and personal search of the accused Ashu was carried out vide Ex. PW1/C . 5. Witness was cross-examined on 12.08.2011 and during cross-examination by ld. Defence counsel she stated that she does not remember when she took the house of the accused on rent. She further stated that she along with her parent lived in the house of accused only for three months. She further stated that she does not remember what actual rent was paid for the 3 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu said accommodation. She further stated that she used to attend her duty from 10:00 am till 07:00 pm and the office remained closed on Sunday. She admitted that 3-4 other tenant also used to reside in the house of the accused at that time. She further deposed that alleged incident happened on 21.07.2007 at about 02:00 pm (lunch time). She further stated that the distance between her office and place of incident is about 2 km. She further stated that she has already disclosed the fact that one more person was with accused Ashu at the time of recording of her statement. She admitted that when she raised alarm some persons of the locality gathered on the spot. She further stated that police did not reach at the spot. She voluntarily stated that in the evening she told the incident to accused Ashu's father and after that informed police and she reached at her house at 07:00 pm she told about the incident first to her brother. She admitted that when she told to her brother about the incident her parents were also present. She further stated that at about 07:30 pm, she along with her family members went to police station. She further stated that he visited to the police station only once. She further stated that police recorded her statement in the police station. She further stated that she could not tell the time when police recorded her statement She admitted that her statement was recorded by police after 20 minutes, when they reached to the police station and she told to the police that accused slapped her and police asked her for medical examination but she refused. She further stated that police did not come to her 4 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu house after the date of incident. She further stated that she went to the spot with police after ½ days of incident. She denied the suggestion that no such incident took place and due to non payment of rent by her father to accused person, a false case was registered by her. She denied the suggestion that the place where she used to live, a dispute between owner of the house and her parents took place and the same was compromised after taking some amount. 6. PW2 Sonu Khan brother of the complainant in his examination deposed that on 21.11.2007 at about 02:00 pm, his sister namely Nagma came to him and told that accused Ashu met her on the road and asked her to get him introduced to one Pooja and when she refused and said that she did not know any Pooja, accused misbehaved with her and slapped her. He further deposed that he along with his sister complained to Ashu's parents but they did not pay any heed and were bent up to quarrel with them, then he informed them to police and got registered a case. He further deposed that police recorded the statement of his sister. He further deposed that he saw a scratch injury on the right hand of his sister. 7. Witness was cross-examined by defence counsel and during cross-examination he stated that he informed the police at about 07:30 pm in the evening on that day and at about 08:00 pm, police reached at his house. He admitted that when the police reached at the house of accused, he was present there. He further stated that police recorded his statement in the police 5 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu station and statement of his sister was also recorded in the police station. He admitted that police arrested the accused in his presence. He further stated that he visited police station only once and no dispute had taken place between him and parents of accused prior to this incident. He denied the suggestion that the real disputes was for non payment of rent by him. He admitted that when the incident took place he was not present at the spot. 8. PW3 HC Ashok Kumar is the Duty Officer who proved on record the FIR Ex. PW3/A. 9. PW4 ASI Ezaz Ahmed in his examination in chief stated that on 21.11.2007, he was posted at PS Shakarpur as ASI. On that day after receipt of DD No. 37, he alongwith Ct. Jitender reached at the spot i.e. Mazar Wali Jhuggi, Near Sulabh Sauchalaya, near Ramesh Park where the complainant Nagma and her brother Sonu met them. He recorded the statement of Nagma which is already exhibited as Ex. PW-1/A bearing his attestation at point B. Nagma told him that the incident took place at about 2.00pm in front DDA Park, Lalita Park, Laxmi Nagar. He prepared rukka Ex. PW-4/A bearing his signature at point A and sent the same through Ct. Jitender for registration of case. He alongwith Nagma and her brother reached at DDA park where site plan was prepared at the instance of complainant which is Ex. PW-4/B bearing his signature at point A. In the meantime Ct. Jitender returned back at the spot and copy of FIR and original rukka and he mentioned FIR No. in site plan. 6 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu Thereafter , he alongwith complainant and her brother and Ct. Jitender reached the house of alleged persons namely Mohd. Ashu who was present in front of his house. He was arrested at the instance of Nagma vide arrest memo Ex. PW-1/B and personal search Ex. PW-1/C bearing his signature at point B. Accused was correctly identified by the witness. Accused was released on bail and thereafter, he recorded statement of complainant and her brother U/s 161 Cr.P.C . and returned to PS where statement of Ct. Jitender was recorded. He prepared charge sheet and submitted to court through SHO. 10. He was cross-examined by ld. Defence counsel and during cross-examination he stated that he and Ct. Jitender reached at Mazar Wali Jhuggi at about 8.55pm and remained there for about 50 minutes. He further stated that he alongwith complainant reached at the alleged place of occurrence i.e. in front of DDA Park, Lalita Park at about 10.00pm and remained there for about one hour and he prepared the site plan under the street light in the park. Ct. Jitender reached there at about 11.15pm. He further stated that he returned back at the house of accused at about 11.30pm and he had arrested the accused at about 11.45pm. The witness was confronted with arrest memo Ex. PW-1/B where time of arrest is not mentioned. He further stated that he took about one year in proceedings of arrest etc and left for PS at about 12.30am. He further stated that he does not remember the arrival entry. He denied the suggestion that Ct. Jitender never reached at the place of occurrence i.e. DDA Park, 7 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu Lalita Park. He denied the suggestion that all the documentary proceedings were taken place at PS. He denied the suggestion that accused was falsely implicated on the instance of complainant. 11. PW-5 Ct. Jitender in his examination in chief deposed that on 21.11.2007, he was posted at PS Shakarpur as Ct. On that day after receipt of DD No. 37, he alongwith ASI Ezaz Ahmed reached at the spot i.e. Mazar Wali Jhuggi, Near Sulabh Sauchalaya, near Ramesh Park where the complainant Nagma and her brother Sonu met them. He further deposed that ASI Ezaz Ahmed recorded the statement of Nagma and prepared rukka and sent him to PS for registration of case. He further stated that he reached at PS and handed over the complaint and rukka to DO HC Ashok Kumar, who returned back to him with copy of FIR and original rukka after registration of case and after registration of case he reached at place of occurrence i.e. at DDA park and handed over the copy of FIR and original rukka to ASI Ezaz Ahmed. He further stated that accused was arrested from in front of his house vide arrest memo already exhibited as Ex. PW-1/B and personal search memo already exhibited as Ex. PW-1/C bearing his signature at point C. He further deposed that accused was released on bail and thereafter, ASI Ezaz Ahmed recorded statement of complainant and her brother U/s 161 Cr.P.C . and returned to PS where his statement was recorded. 12. He was cross-examined by ld. Defence counsel and during cross-examination he stated that he and ASI Ezaz Ahmed 8 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu reached at Mazar Wali Jhuggi at about 9.00pm and remained there for about 45 minutes and rukka was handed over to him at about 9.45pm and he reached at PS within 5 minutes. He further stated that statement U/s 161 Cr.P.C . of complainant and her brother was recorded at DDA Park, Lalita Park. They left DDA Park, Lalita Park at about 11.30pm and left house of accused and complainant at about 12.30am. He further stated that he does not remember the number of arrival entry at PS. He admitted that they took accused to PS and he was released on bail at about 1.30am. He denied the suggestion that he never joined the investigation of present case or that he put his signature at PS or that he is deposing falsely on the instance of IO. 13. After completion of prosecution evidence, statement of accused was recorded u/s 313 Cr. PC. wherein all the incriminating evidence was put to the accused but the same was denied by them as incorrect as it is a false case due to enmity and the complainant was residing with her parents at the premises which belonged to his parents and they wanted to get it vacated that was why they had implicated him in the present case. 14. Arguments heard. Both counsel heard. Record perused. 15. On the date of incident as stated, she had come to take lunch at her tenanted place and after taking lunch when she was going back to the office, accused intercepted her in the gali no. 9 near the export office and asked her to get him introduced to one Pooja and when she refused by saying that she did not know 9 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu any Pooja, accused slapped her and kicked her and pulled her and some other boy was also present along with him who was not arrested. Accused has been correctly identified by the witness during her deposition in the court. She has further stated that when she left alarm they left her and ran away. She also fell down on the road. She has further stated that she went back weeping to her home and told all these facts to her brother and when her mother complainant about this act of accused to his father. He did not pay any heed and thereafter they went to police station for making complaint. She was cross-examined by ld. Defence counsel wherein, ld. Counsel put a suggestion that no such incident took place and false case has been registered against accused due to non payment of rent by the father of the complainant to the accused person. The plea taken by the defence counsel is that there was a dispute of non payment of rent between family members of the complainant and the father of the accused and therefore, the accused was implicated in a false case. The brother of the complainant Sonu Khan was also examined whose evidence is also hearsay evidence as he was not present at the time of incident. However, he has stated that he along with his sister complained to Mohd. Ashu's parents but they did not pay any heed. Thereafter, a case was registered. The incident took place at about about 02:00 pm as stated by PW1 as well as PW2. However, it is also an admitted fact that police was informed at 07:30 pm in the evening only. Ld. Counsel for accused has stated that a false case has been 10 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu registered and there was no occasion for the complainant to come to the house in the afternoon as she was working from 10 am to 07 pm in some export house. Though this fact has been admitted by the complainant in her complaint that she used to join her duty from 10:00 am to 07:00 pm in her examination in chief but she has very clearly explained that on the date of incident she had come to take lunch at her house and while coming back from the house to the office, the accused obstructed her along with his co-associate (not arrested) and slapped and kicked her. She has further stated that on raising alarm both the accused persons ran away. No suggestion has been put to the witness with regard to the fact that how she was present in the afternoon when she was working in a office. Ld. Counsel for accused has also stated that the investigation has not been done on the spot. The complainant herself in this regard has stated that her statement was recorded in the police station. The brother of the complainant has also admitted the same. It is pertinent to mention here that the factual matrix has been proved by the complainant. As regards the investigation part is concerned, the same is beyond control of a layman. It is the police official who is responsible for conducting the same. In case the investigation is not conducted in a proper manner, accused cannot get benefit of the same and would not be entitled to acquittal. Here in the present case, even though this fact has come on record that the statement of complainant was taken in the police station. On the other hand, PW4 ASI Ezaz 11 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu Ahmed has stated that they went to spot on receipt of DD No. 37-A. Though both the statements are contrary. However, the same is not so material as would affect the case of the prosecution case in a fatal manner. As far as the factual matrix of the case is concerned, the same has been proved by the complainant beyond reasonable doubt. The accused has not proved anything in his defence in order to prove that there was any dispute between the members of the complainant family and the accused family with regard to the rent. Further the factum of accused being present at the spot also not been disputed by the accused as no question has been put with regard to the same to the witness in his cross-examination. In view of the material on record, the offence of commission wrongful restraint as well as physical assault has been proved though the MLC of the complainant is not on record. The fact remains that the testimony of the complainant cannot be discarded in the absence of medical MLC as she has herself stated in her cross- examination that she did not get her medically examined. The deposition of the witness on oath with regard to the fact that the accused had slapped and kicked her is sufficient to invoke section 323 IPC. As regards the section 354 IPC, nothing has come in evidence to show that there was any intention on the part of the accused Mohd. Ashu to outrage the modesty of the complainant. The case of the prosecution is also that she wanted to know about some girl Pooja and wanted to talk to her and that is why he stopped the complaint in the way and in these 12 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu circumstances, section 354 IPC is not made out. Reliance placed on Aman Kumar Vs. State of Haryana AIR 2004 SC 1497 wherein, it was held that the essence of a woman's modesty is her sex. The culpable intention of the accused is the crux of the matter. The reaction of the woman is very relevant. But its absence is not always decisive. Modesty in this section is an attribute associated with female human beings as a class. It is a virtue which attaches to a female owing to her. Since there was no allegation of intention of accused to outrage the modesty of the complainant, offence punishable u/s 354 IPC is not made out. Offence punishable u/s 342 along with 323 IPC stands proved. Hence, accused is convicted for the charge framed for offence punishable u/s 323 / 342 IPC and acquitted for offence u/s 354 IPC. Put up for arguments on point of sentence for 22.6.2012. Announced in the open court (VANDANA JAIN) Dated: 31.5.2012 M.M./Mahila Court ( E) 13 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu 31.5.2012 Present: Ld. APP for State. Accused present on bail with counsel M.A. Khan. Vide separate judgment dictated and pronounced in the open court, accused is convicted for the charge framed for offence punishable u/s 323 / 342 IPC and acquitted for offence u/s 354 IPC. Put up for arguments on point of sentence for 22.6.2012. (VANDANA JAIN) M.M./Mahila Court (E) 31.5.2012 14 State Vs. Mohd. Ashu 10.5.2012 Present: Ld. APP for State. Accused produced from JC. Shri R.S.Juneja, ld. Counsel for accused. Arguments heard. Put up for order on 17.5.2012. (VANDANA JAIN) M.M./Mahila Court (E) 10.5.2012 17.5.2012 Present: Ld. APP for State. Accused produced from JC. Shri R.S. Juneja, ld. Counsel for accused. Vide separate judgment dictated and pronounced in the open court, accused is acquitted for the offence punishable u/s 406 IPC in case FIR No. 70/1988, PS Geeta Colony. Let accused be released forthwith. Provision of section 437 (a) shall apply and previous surety shall remain as surety for next six months. Let file be consigned to Record Room. (VANDANA JAIN) M.M./Mahila Court (E) 17.5.2012 15