Seetharam vs Dayalan Housing Co­Op.Society Limited on 31 August, 2020 1 IN THE COURT OF XXIV ADDL. CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE, BENGALURU DATED THIS THE 31st DAY OF AUGUST 2020 C.C. No.25865/10 Present: SRI. BALAGOPALAKRISHNA. XXIV ADDL. C.M.M., BENGALURU. COMPLAINANT : Seetharam, NO.332, 15th cross, II stage, II phase, Mahalakshmi layout, Bangalore. (Rep.by H.Basavaraj, Advocate) V/s. Accused 1. Dayalan Housing Co­op.Society limited, (Registered as No.JRB/RSR/RGN/20/RCS/695/72­73 D 3­6­ 72, Rep. By its Secretary, G.Ramakrishna. (Dismissed u/s.203 of Cr.P.C.,) 2. G.Ramakrishna, s/o.late.Giriyappa, No.154, Sri.Dayalan Housing Co operative Society Ltd., II stage, Geology layout, Near ITI colony, Bangalore. DATE OF COMMENCEMENT OF : 17/5/08 OFFENCE DATE OF ARREST OF THE : Accused No.2 is on bail. ACCUSED OFFENCES ALLEGED : U/s.499 and 500 r/w.34 of IPC . 2 DATE OF COMMENCEMENT OF : 08/11/2011 EVIDENCE DATE OF CLOSING OF : 24/03/18 EVIDENCE OPINION OF THE JUDGE : Accused No.2 found not guilty (Balagopalakrishna.) XXIV A.C.M.M., BENGALURU. JUDGMENT The complainant has filed this private complaint u/s.200 of Cr.P.C., against the accused alleging that they have committed an offences punishable u/s.500 of IPC. 2. Soon after filing the complaint this court has taken cognizance for the offences punishable u/s.500 of IPC and posted the case for recording the sworn statement, accordingly, sworn statement of the complainant was recorded. As per the order dtd: 14/5/10, a case was registered against accused No.2 for the said offence and acting u/s.203 of Cr.P.C., complaint was Dismissed against accused No.1. 3. Summons was issued to the accused No.2 and accused No.2 was appeared through the counsel and he is on bail. 4. The accusation was read over and explained to the accused No.2 in the language known to him, he pleaded not guilty and claimed 3 for trial. 5. The case of the complainant in brief are as under: It is the case of the complainant that Dayalan Housing Co operative Society is registered as per the Co operative Societies Act (accused No.1). Accused No.2 is the Secretary of the said Society. It is further alleged that accused No.2 and Board members were cheating the members of the Society, so, he has given a complaint to the Registrar of Co operative Society and inturn it was referred to Joint Registrar of Co operative Society , wherein the complaint was came to be registered in SL.No.JRB/H/69/2007­08. In the said proceedings the accused No.2 given a statement in writing and same was filed before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society on 15­5­08/17­5­08, in the said statement the accused No.2 has made defamatory allegation, the copy of the same is also produced. It is further alleged that on 17/5/08 after finishing case before Joint Registrar of Co operative society, the complainant came out from the said authority, the accused No.2 read over the defamatory allegation made in the written statement infront of complainant, friends and advocates who were near the court hall. It is further alleged that in the afternoon accused No.2 went to Khanija Bhavan and has read over the same to the friends, well wishers and the members of the society with an intention to defame the dignity of the complainant in the eyes of the society. The defamatory allegation made in the written statement ie., 4 reply filed before the Joint Commissioner is read as under : ­ ದ ವವಂಚಕ ಹಾಗಗೂ ಮಮೋಸಗಾರನಾಗಿದರು ಇವರರು ಒಬಬ ಸಮಾಜ ಘಾತರುಕ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ದ ಅಪರಾಧ ದ ಸವಂಘದ ಸದಸವನಾಗದಿದದರಗೂ ಸಹ ಸವಂಘದ ಸದಸವನವಂದರು ಹಮೋಳಿಕಗೂವಂಡರು ಸರುಳರು ಸಸಭಾವದ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ಳ ದಾಖಲೆಗಳನರು ನ ಸಸೃಷಷ್ಟಿಸಿರರುವ ಆರಗೂಮೋಪದ ಮಮೋಲೆ ಇವರ ವಿರರುದದ ಕ ಕಮಿನಲ್ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸಲರು ಜ್ಞಾನಭಾರತಿ ಆರಕ್ಷಕ ಠಾಣೆಯಲ್ಲಿ ದಗೂರರು ದಾಖಲ ದ ತನಿಖಾಧಿಕಾರಿಗಳರು ಸರಿಯಾಗಿ ವಿಚಾರಣೆ ಲ ಡಿದರು ನಡೆಸಿ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸದಮೋ ಇರರುವ ಕಾರಣದಿವಂದ ವಕಮೋಲರನರು ನ ಸವಂಪಕರ್ಕಿಸಿ ಕ ಕವಿರುನಲ್ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸಲರು ಉದ್ದೇಶಿಸಲಗಿದ. It is further stated that the complainant has a very good reputation with his friends, well wishers and relatives in Bangalore. Because of the said statement, the complainant had put great humiliation and mental torture with his friends and well wishers and he is not in a position to face the society. Since the statement as well as avernments made by the accused No.2 in the public places with an intention to defame the very character of the complainant itself and in order to put an end for the same, the complainant was issued notice to accused on 11/6/08 through RPAD and UCP, UCP was served on the accused NO.2, whereas RPAD was returned with a shara by the postman that intimation was dropped. After service of the notice, the accused neither replied nor complied with the demand of the complainant. Thus, contended that accused No.2 has committed an offence punishable u/s.500 of IPC. 5 6. In order to substantiate the case of the complainant, he himself examined as PW 1, Ex.P.1 to Ex.P.28 are got marked, in support of the version of PW 1, PW 2 and 3 by name M.S.Sanjeev and Lakshmipathi are also examined and closed his side. 7. Statement of the accused No.2 as provided u/s.313 of Cr.P.C., was recorded, wherein accused No.2 denied the incriminating evidence found in the evidence of complainant as false. Ex.D.1 to Ex.D.6 are confronted in the cross examination of the PW 1 to 3. 8. Heard both sides, perused the records. 10. The following point arises for my consideration: 1) Whether complainant proves beyond reasonable doubt that, on 17/5/08 the accused No.2 while filing objections before the Joint Registrar of Co operative has made a defamatory statement against the complainant, after finishing the case before the said Authority, when complainant came out from the courthall, at that time, the accused No.2 read over the defamatory statement before the public and on the same day at about 3.00 PM the accused No.2 has read over the very same defamatory statement in the Khanija Bhavan infront of public and thereby accused has committed an offences punishable U/s.500 of IPC ? 2) What order? 6 11. My answer to the above points is as under; Point No.1­ In the Negative. Point No.2­As per final order for the following; REASONS 12. POINT NO.1 : The sum and substance of the case of the complainant is that there is a dispute among him and accused No.2 before the Joint Registrar of Co­operative Society in respect of his membership. Particularly on 17/5/08 the accused No.2 has filed written objection containing derogatory and defamatory statement, same was read over in the court hall, then outside the court hall and also very same word at Khanija bhavan at about 3.00 pm., thus, contended that accused has committed an offence punishable u/s.500 of IPC. The complainant in order to substantiate his case, he himself examined as PW 1 and in his examination in chief he has reiterated the avernments made in the complaint and got marked following documents. Ex.P.1 is the Complaint Ex.P.2 is the office copy of the Legal Notice Ex.P.3 is the UCP receipt Ex.P.4 is the returned postal cover Ex.P.5 is the copy of the complaint given by complainant to Registrar of Co operative Societies Ex.P.6 is the portion of the written objection filed by the accused No.2 before the Joint Registrar of the Co 7 operative society Ex.P.7 is the order sheet dtd: 24/4/08 of Joint Registrar of Co operative society Ex.P.8 is the cc of the Order of 3rd Addl.Bangalore Urban District Consumer Dispute Redressal Forum in complaint No.1895/07 dtd: 19/2/08 Ex.P.9 is the copy of the Bangalore Mirror Daily newspaper dtd: 25/8/07 Ex.P.10 is the copy of the complaint given by the complainant to Lokayuktha Ex.P.11 is the cc of the Order passed by the HHCK in Crl.Pet.No.779/10 and 780/10 dtd: 15/7/10 Ex.P.12 is the cc of the complaint in PCR.NO.31074 (CC.No.11370/06) Ex.P.13 is the entire order sheet in CC.No.11370/06 Ex.P.14 is the cc of the complaint filed by one Channegowda before 9th ACMM Ex.P.15 is the cc of the order sheet in PCR.No.3954/12 Ex.P.16 is the cc of the FIR in Cr.No.96/12 Ex.P.17 is the copy of the Notice issued by Jnanabharathi police to the complainant Ex.P.18 is the Form­A filed by the complainant under Right to Information Rules 2005 to the Jnanabharathi police Ex.P.19 is the Postal receipt Ex.P.20 is the COP receipt 8 Ex.P.21 is the returned postal cover Ex.P.22 is the cc of Order passed in PCR.1456/93 Ex.P.23 is the cc of the Order passed in CC.No.20337/10 Ex.P.24 is the copy of the charge made by Special Court for Economics in CC.No.554/01 dtd: 17/1/04 Ex.P.25 is the cc of the Order of HHCK in Crl.A.No.635/04 dtd: 28/9/10 Ex.P.26 is the copy of the Kannada Prabha News paper dtd: 03­04­10 Ex.P.27 is the cc of the order passed by HHCK in W.P.No.26985/14 (GM Police) dtd: 26/8/14 Ex.P.28 is the Endorsement issued by the Mahalakshmi layout police Ex.P.29 is the Legal opinion given by the Addl.Government Advocate on the order passed by the HHCK in W.P.No.26915/14 In the cross examination of the complainant, following facts has been elicited:­ 1) He has not produced any document to show that he is the member of Dayalan Society in the year 1987, 2) He denied that so many cases has been filed against him by the Mahalakshmi layout police and admitted that Cr.No.137/99 and 138/99 registered by the Mahalakshmi layout police was quashed by the HHCK in Cr.A.No.635/04. 3) A case was registered in Cr.No.45/10 for the offence u/s.379 , 9 504 , 506 of IPC and he volunteers same was ended in Acquittal. 4) In the Lankesh Patrike, Kannada, an article was published against him on 5/10/05 as per Ex.D.1 has been admitted and witness volunteers that he has filed a case against the publisher. 5) The witness admitted that an application submitted by him to Karnataka State Bar Council as per Ex.D.2 wherein column NO.15(a) to 15(c) he has mentioned 'No'. 6) In the further cross examination case of the complainant has been denied that the accused No.2 has not made any defamatory and derogatory statement before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society, in the public places, same is denied by the witness. 7) The witness has also admitted that Bar council was suspended him doing Advocacy, witness volunteers that only one day he was suspended and now he has questioned the same before the All India Bar Council and obtained Stay order and he has possessed the said document. 8) He has also admitted that his name had mentioned in the rowdy sheet by the Mahalakshmi layout police, but, witness volunteers that same was Quashed and also denied that as per the Rowdy sheet, 92 cases are pending. 9) It is suggested that by filing these false cases, he is bringing pressure on the accused No.2 to get the site from the accused No.2, same is denied by the complainant. Rest of the cross examination is denial of the chief examination. 13. In support of the version of the PW 1/complainant, the PW 2 10 one Mr.M.S.Sanjeev has been examined. He has given evidence in respect of the incident taken place on 17/5/08 at 3.00 pm., at Khanija Bhavan. He has deposed that on the said day, he had been to said Bhavan to check borewell water, at that time, infront of Canteen, the accused was abusing the complainant in a filthy word, at that time, he asked the complainant why the accused is abusing him, for that, complainant told that he does not know why the accused abusing him. The accused was abusing the complainant as 'Lopher Nan maga, Kalla Nan maga, Evana Mathanu Yaru Nambabedi'. He further deposed that the said words uttered in the public place. In the cross examination he has admitted that he knows the accused since 20 years and last 5 years he is practicing as an Advocate. It is further suggested that the name of the complainant is in the rowdy list and he is facing nearly 32­35 criminal cases, so many times he was in Jail and he has given false information to the Karnataka State Bar Council and he was debarred from the Bar Council, witness claimed his ignorance and also claimed ignorance how many cases has been filed against the complainant by the Society. He has also admitted that he has not produced any documents to show that in order to check up the water on 17/5/08 he had been to Khanija Bhavan, though he is having and rest of the cross examination is just denial of the chief examination. 14. Apart from the PW 2, the complainant got examined the PW 3, he has given his evidence to the effect that the accused No.2 abused the 11 complainant infront of the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society while case was going on and also the complainant came out from the said society in a public place, abused the complainant saying 'ಇವನರು ಮಮೋಸಗಾರ ಸಮಾಜಘಾತರುಕ, ಕ ಕಮಿನಲ್ ಹಿನನಲೆಯರುಳಳವನರು ಮತರುಕ ಫಕಡ್ ಎವಂದರು ಸಾವರ್ಕಿಜನಿಕರ ಎದರುರರು ಬಬೈದಿರರುತಕರ. He further deposed that when the accused was uttering the said words nearly 15­20 publics were present and said words uttered by the accused No.2 in order to defame the dignity of the complainant in the public place. In the cross examination he has stated that for the first time, he had seen the accused No.2 before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society and he knows the accused since 15 years since he is an advocate. On 17/5/08 he does not have any matters before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society and he does not have any document to show that on that day he was present before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society. He has also admitted that the alleged incident had taken place in the court hall, at that time, the publics and other advocates were present. In further cross examination, a criminal cases pending against the complainant, his name has been mentioned in the rowdy sheeter, the complainant has been suspended from the Bar council and there was an article published in the paper and other criminal matters pending against complainant has been suggested, the witness claimed his ignorance. It is suggested that as alleged by him, no incident was taken infront of Joint Registrar of Co operative Society, 12 outside the court hall and in order to help the complainant, he is deposing false, same is denied by the witness. 15. The learned counsel appearing for the complainant Sri.NM vehemently argued that the complainant is an Advocate by profession, when he had been to attend the case before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society, the accused No.2 in the counter objection mentioned the defamatory and derogatory statement against the complainant on 17/5/08 and also before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society and when the complainant came out from the courthall outside infront of the public, the accused No.2 used the very same words, thereby his image has been tarnished in the eye of the public. It is further argued that on the very same day, when the complainant had been to Khanija Bhavan at 3.00 pm., at that time also, the accused No.2 used the defamatory and derogatory words in the public place. The evidence of PW 1 is also supported by two independent witnesses, thus contended that the oral evidence coupled with documentary evidence produced by the complainant clearly establish the guilt against the accused No.2, accordingly prayed to convict the accused for the offence u/s.500 of IPC. 16. On the other hand, the learned counsel Sri.RMDR, Advocate for accused No.2 vehemently argued that whatever the incidents mentioned by the complainants i.e., in the courthall of the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society, outside the court and alleged incident taken place at Khanija Bhavan are all created stories, in order to get a site from the accused No.2 by using these coercive methods. It is 13 further argued that considering the criminal background of the complainant, suspension of the complainant from the Karnataka State Bar Council, clearly establish that complainant is having a bad character. Under such situation, even if the said avernments made by the accused No.2 is nothing but an express his opinion to save the other publics to have a contact with the complainant, thus, contended that the accused No.2 comes under the exception No.1 and 9 of the Sec.499 of IPC. It is further argued that whatever the witnesses supports the version of the complainant are all familiar to him, naturally they are supports the case of the complainant, therefore, their evidence is not a trust worthy. There is no corroboration in the evidence of PW 1 to 3 and further the complainant has failed to prove the guilt against the accused beyond all reasonable doubt, thus benefit of doubt may be extended to him and accordingly prayed to acquit the accused No.2. 17. Before discussing the case of the complainant, it is necessary to reproduce the Sec.499 which deals with defamation and Sec.500 of IPC deals with punishment for defamation. Sec.499 of IPC defines defamation :­ Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representation makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of such person. The said section is also having as many as 10 exceptions. Out of which first and ninth exceptions are relevant to the case on hand. First 14 exception :­ Imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published - it is not a defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for public good at the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact. Ninth Exception :­ Imputation made in good faith by a person for protection of his or others interest - it is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interest of the person making it, or of any other person or for the public good. 18. It is admitted fact that a matter was pending before the Joint Registrar of Co­operative Society, same was registered on the complaint given by the complainant herein and one Ramdas in a dispute No.JRB House 69/2007­08 as per Ex.P.7. As per Ex.P.5, the complainant herein requested the Registrar on 22/1/08 to forfeit all the documents, illegally sold and remaining land retained by the Dayalan Housing Co operative Society and redistributed the sites to the members. From the said Ex.P.5 and Ex.P.7, it is obviously clear that the complainant herein is litigating against the Secretary of Dayalan Housing Co operative Society i.e., accused No.2 to get the site. In order to create a nexus between complainant and accused No.2 at the first instance, the complainant has to produce some documents to say that he is the member of the Dayalan Housing Co operative Society. In this regard, as admitted by the complainant himself in the cross examination he has 15 not produced any documents. This fact need not be discussed in detail whether complainant is the member of the said society or not because, same is not relevant here. 19. In the present case, the alleged incident had taken place on 17/5/08 on 3 occasions i.e., 1) Before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society while filing the written objection to the claim of the complainant ; 2) After finishing the case before the said authority, when complainant came out from the court hall, the accused No.2 has read over the avernments made in the objections infront of the publics; 3) On the same day at about 3.00 pm., in the public place at Khanija Bhavan, the accused No.2 abused the complainant by using defamatory and derogatory words. Thus joining the said three cause of actions, the present complaint has been filed by the complainant alleging that because of the using the defamatory and derogatory words in the public place, his image has been come down in the eye of the public, hence, sought for convict the accused No.2 for the offence punishable u/s.499 of IPC. As per the Ex.P.6, the accused No.2 while filing objections before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society for the claim of the complainant , he has used following words: ­ ದ ವವಂಚಕ ಹಾಗಗೂ ಮಮೋಸಗಾರನಾಗಿದರು ಇವರರು ಒಬಬ ಸಮಾಜ ಘಾತರುಕ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ದ ಅಪರಾಧ ದ ಸವಂಘದ ಸದಸವನಾಗದಿದದರಗೂ ಸಹ ಸವಂಘದ ಸದಸವನವಂದರು ಹಮೋಳಿಕಗೂವಂಡರು ಸರುಳರು ಸಸಭಾವದ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ಳ 16 ದಾಖಲೆಗಳನರು ನ ಸಸೃಷಷ್ಟಿಸಿರರುವ ಆರಗೂಮೋಪದ ಮಮೋಲೆ ಇವರ ವಿರರುದದ ಕ ಕಮಿನಲ್ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸಲರು ಜ್ಞಾನಭಾರತಿ ಆರಕ್ಷಕ ಠಾಣೆಯಲ್ಲಿ ದಗೂರರು ದಾಖಲ ದ ತನಿಖಾಧಿಕಾರಿಗಳರು ಸರಿಯಾಗಿ ವಿಚಾರಣೆ ಲ ಡಿದರು ನಡೆಸಿ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸದಮೋ ಇರರುವ ಕಾರಣದಿವಂದ ವಕಮೋಲರನರು ನ ಸವಂಪಕರ್ಕಿಸಿ ಕ ಕವಿರುನಲ್ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸಲರು ಉದ್ದೇಶಿಸಲಗಿದ. 20. Now I restrict my discussion only in respect of whether any allegations made in the written statement as a counter blast is amounts to a defamation or not has to be considered. In this regard, the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in the matter of Augada Ram Shaha v/s. Nemai Chand Shaha 23.C.867 : 12 IND. Dec (ns) 576, it is held that :­ Defamatory statement made in the written statement of a party in a judicial proceedings are not absolutely privileged in this country, and that a qualified privilege in this regard cannot be claimed in respect of such statements, unless they fall within the exception to Sec.499 of IPC. From the above, it is gathered that even defamatory or derogatory words used at the time of filing written statements, objections as a counter blast, it attracts Sec.499 of IPC, but, the party who has filed the written statement or objections has to prove the said avernments are comes within the exceptions to the sec.499 of IPC. In this case, as discussed above there is a litigation among the complainant and the accused No.2 in respect of the site to be allotted to the complainant. 17 Here, the statement filed by the accused No.2 has to be segregated to appreciate the facts of this case. No.1 is ಇವರರು ಒಬಬ ಸಮಾಜ ಘಾತರುಕ ದ ವವಂಚಕ ಹಾಗಗೂ ಮಮೋಸಗಾರನಾಗಿದರು ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ದ ಅಪರಾಧ ಸಸಭಾವದ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ದ , NO.2 is ಸವಂಘದ ಸದಸವನಾಗದಿದದರಗೂ ಸಹ ಸವಂಘದ ಸದಸವನವಂದರು ಹಮೋಳಿಕಗೂವಂಡರು ಸರುಳರು ಳ ದಾಖಲೆಗಳನರು ನ ಸಸೃಷಷ್ಟಿಸಿರರುವ ಆರಗೂಮೋಪದ ಮಮೋಲೆ ಇವರ ವಿರರುದದ ಕ ಕಮಿನಲ್ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸಲರು ಜ್ಞಾನಭಾರತಿ ಆರಕ್ಷಕ ಠಾಣೆಯಲ್ಲಿ ದಗೂರರು ದಾಖಲ ದ ತನಿಖಾಧಿಕಾರಿಗಳರು ಸರಿಯಾಗಿ ವಿಚಾರಣೆ ನಡೆಸಿ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸದಮೋ ಇರರುವ ಲ ಡಿದರು ನ ಸವಂಪಕರ್ಕಿಸಿ ಕ ಕವಿರುನಲ್ ಕ ಕಮ ಜರರುಗಿಸಲರು ಉದ್ದೇಶಿಸಲಗಿದ.. So far as ಕಾರಣದಿವಂದ ವಕಮೋಲರನರು Sl.No.1 of the statement, obviously a defamatory and derogatory statement used by the accused No.2 against the complainant. So far as Sl.No.2 of the statement, it is a counter blast by way of defence. 21. The complainant has not produced any documents to say that what had happened to the matter pending before the Joint Registrar of Co­operative Society. It is further case of the complainant that after filing the written objections by mentioning the above defamatory and derogatory statement, the same was read over in the Court hall before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society as per the evidence of PW 3. The proceedings taken place before the Joint Registrar of Co­operative Society is a quasi judicial authority. If really the said statement has been read over before the said Quasi judicial authority, same should have been mentioned in the order sheet, on careful reading of the proceedings dtd: 17/5/08, the Presiding Officer, in his order sheet has not mentioned anything except noting that he has received parawise 18 reply along with the documents and adjourned the case at the request of the complainant herein. If really there was any incident taken place before the Joint Registrar of Co­operative Society, same should have been mentioned in the order sheet and complainant should have been examined the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society before the court to prove the incident taken place before him in the court hall, no such attempt is made by him. Though the evidence of PW 1 is corroborated with the evidence of PW 3, without examining the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society or any advocate present on that day to pursue the case before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society, same is not helpful to the case of the complainant. Thus, it is obviously clear that the accused No.2 has filed the written statement by using the said words to the Quasi judicial authorities and not before the public. Therefore, the cause of action No.1 has not been established by the complainant before the court. 22. The second cause of action is as per the complainant is after finishing the case, when he and accused No.2 came out from the court hall, he has used the very same word and abused the complainant. In this regard, the complainant should have furnished the correct time when the proceedings before the Joint Registrar of Co operative Society was concluded and what time he came out from the court hall and time should have been specifically mentioned. Instead of that, the complainant simply made an allegation that the accused No.2 after came out from the court hall by using the very same words, accused No.2 abused him. No doubt the version of the PW 1 is supported by the 19 PW 3 who is the friend of the complainant. In the cross examination a question was put to him, what purpose he has gone to Joint Registrar of Co­operative Society, at that time, he has stated that for the purpose of registration of Co operative Society, he had been to there and he does not have any document to that effect. If really the PW 3 had been to Joint Registrar of Co operative Society for registration of the Society, he should have furnished some documents or he should have narrated name of the society where it is situated etc., Without that, on 17/5/08 he was present along with the complainant/PW 1 cannot be accepted, only inference can be drawn is the PW 1 and 3 are practicing together as an advocates and naturally he supports the version of the PW 1. Therefore, the only evidence available on record is PW 1. On the sole evidence of PW 1, the court cannot come to the conclusion that the accused No.2 after finishing the case infront of Joint Registrar of Co­ operative Society and he came out and abused the complainant by using defamatory and derogatory words. 23. Now comes to the third cause of action :­ According to the complainant on 17/5/08 at about 3.00 pm., when the complainant had been to Khanija Bhavan, there also the accused No.2 came there and abused the complainant by using defamatory and derogatory words in the public place. In the evidence of PW 1 he has stated that the same day at about 3.00 pm., when I had been near Khanija Bhavan at that time also, accused No.2 was present, there started making the defamatory statement against me in the presence of my friends and 20 colleagues. This is the third incident, therefore, he has to give full details what exact words used by the accused No.2 and who were all present i.e., colleagues and friends in detail. Except saying above, no details has been furnished by the complainant. To prove the said incident, the complainant in support of his version, PW 2 by name Sanjeev has been examined, in his evidence, he has stated that the accused No.2 abused the complainant as 'Lopher Nan maga, Kalla Nan maga, Evana Mathanu Yaru Nambabedi' and further his evidence reveals that the said words uttered by the accused No.2 infront of the Canteen. When the said words compared with the words mentioned in ದ the written statement ಇವರರು ಒಬಬ ಸಮಾಜ ಘಾತರುಕ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ವವಂಚಕ ಹಾಗಗೂ ದ ಅಪರಾಧ ಸಸಭಾವದ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ಮಮೋಸಗಾರನಾಗಿದರು ದ . The said two utterance are different, under such circumstances, it is expected on the part of the complainant to give specific evidence what exact words the accused No.2 used at 3.00 pm., at Khanija Bhavan. The evidence of PW 1 is not corroborates with the evidence of PW 2 in respect of words uttered by the accused No.2 and also exact place. Therefore, the complainant has failed to prove the third cause of action also. 24. As stated above, the written statement filed by the accused No.2 has divided into two parts, out of which, part No.1 i.e., ಇವರರು ಒಬಬ ದ ಸಮಾಜ ಘಾತರುಕ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ದ ವವಂಚಕ ಹಾಗಗೂ ಮಮೋಸಗಾರನಾಗಿದರು ಅಪರಾಧ ಸಸಭಾವದ ದ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು attracts the defamatory and derogatory statement. By filing 21 the written objection by mentioning the said words by the accused No.2 against the complainant clearly attracts Sec.499 of IPC. The said fact has also deposed by the PW 1 in his evidence, for that no independent witness is required. The learned counsel appearing for the accused No.2 apart from cross examining the PW 1 and 3, in his argument, he has stated that the said words mentioned by the accused No.2 in written statement contains a true facts and he made the same for public good and also it was mentioned to protect his interest. As stated above, the complainant alleging that he is a member of Dayalan Co­operative society, since office bearers are made some mischiefs, he made a complaint to the Joint Registrar of Co­operative Society to forfeit documents, sites and remaining lands. At that juncture, in a second part the accused No.2 has rightly taken a contention that complainant is not a member of the society and in this regard, he would file criminal complaints. This is not attracts defamatory and derogatory words. Here, since the accused has claimed defence under exception No.1 and 9, burden is heavy upon him to prove the same. For this, the accused No.2 has taken several contentions that complainant had a criminal background, his name has been mentioned in the rowdy sheeter of the Mahalakshmi layout police and he has furnished false information before the Karnataka State Bar Council and subsequently, Karnataka State Bar Council suspended him from the Advocacy. To prove the said aspect, the accused No.2 has produced some documents and there is an admission on part of the complainant. Therefore, it can inferred that even for Sl.No.1 also, the accused No.2 has sufficient material to say 22 that complainant is ದ ವವಂಚಕ ಹಾಗಗೂ "ಇವರರು ಒಬಬ ಸಮಾಜ ಘಾತರುಕ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ದ ಅಪರಾಧ ಸಸಭಾವದ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ಮಮೋಸಗಾರನಾಗಿದರು ದ " and also give alarm to the public who deal with him. Therefore, the said avernments exactly falls under exception No.1. Further, as per exception No.9, the said avernments has made to protect his interest. Here, as stated above, accused No.2 is a Secretary of the Dayalan Housing Society and the complainant has not produced any document to say that he is a member of the society. Though the accused No.2 has not been examined, through the PW 1 i.e., complainant following documents are confronted :­ Ex.D.1 is Lankesh Patrike weekly dtd: 5/10/05 is produced wherein an article has been mentioned saying that the complainant is a Psychopath. Ex.D.2 is the application submitted by the complainant to the Bar Council on 23/9/10 by mentioning the column No.15 as 'NO'. Ex.D.3­D.4 are the details of cases filed by the Mahalakshmi layout police against the complainant, Ex.D.5 is the order passed by the Karnataka State Bar Council, Ex.D.6 is the certified copy of the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner to open Rowdy Sheeter against the complainant. These documents probablise the version of the accused involved in 23 some criminal activities and in this regard, a rowdy sheet has been opened against him, counter to that no documents are produced by the complainant and the said defence has been taken by the accused No.2 in order to protect his interest. 25. The complainant has produced so many documents and marked at Ex.P.1 to Ex.P.29. Out of which Ex.P.27 i.e., orders of the HHCK in W.P.No.26985/14 wherein HHCK directed respondent No.2 to 4 i.e., The Commissioner of the police to consider the claim of the petitioner/ complainant to remove his name from the rowdy sheeter and Ex.P.28 is the opinion given by the Additional Government Advocate that the said order of the HHCK is not fit for appeal. Under such circumstances, the complainant herein should have produced some document to say that his name has been removed from the rowdy sheeter. But, no such attempt made by the complainant herein. Apart from the above, the complainant has produced many documents which are not relevant to this case, whatever relevant those documents are discussed as stated above. 26. To constitute the offence punishable u/s.500 of IPC, there must be avernments and evidence to the effect that defamatory statement concerning the imputation of the accused was made and said statements have been made with an intention to cause harm the person who made the statement having the right to contend that the imputation made by him false under the exceptions carved in the exception No.1 to 12. The accused taken up the contention that even if the statement is 24 defamatory, it falls under the exceptions at No.1 and 9. 27. Further, the complainant has to demonstrate before this court after such a statement made by the accused No.2, his reputation was brought down in the estimation of the others and it was also seriously affected on his profession. In this regard, the PW 1 just stated that because of the incident, some members of the society started isolating him. It is a vague word, on that basis, the court cannot come to the conclusion that because of the Sl.No.1, the complainant's reputation was brought down in the estimation of the public. PW 2 and 3 were also not expressed their opinion what had happened to the image of the complainant in the eye of the public because of using said Sl.No.1 by the accused No.2 in their evidence. As per the ruling of Hon'ble High Court of Kerala reported in 1990 Crl.L.J.page No.2356 in the matter of C.H.Khadar and another v/s. Fousia wherein it is pleased to held that :­ Unless the imputation was made public and complainant's reputation was brought down in the estimation of the others by the petitioner, they cannot be proceed against for offence u/s.500 of Code. As stated above, the entire statement filed by the accused No.2 not ದ attracts Sec.499 of IPC except Sl.No.1 ಇವರರು ಒಬಬ ಸಮಾಜ ಘಾತರುಕ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ದ ಅಪರಾಧ ಸಸಭಾವದ ವವಕಕಯಾಗಿದರು ವವಂಚಕ ಹಾಗಗೂ ಮಮೋಸಗಾರನಾಗಿದರು ದ . The accused No.2 25 succeeded in proving that the said statement falls under exception 1 and 9. Under such circumstances, through the evidence, the complainant has failed to prove the guilt alleged against the accused No.2 beyond all reasonable doubt. In my opinion, it is a fit case to extend benefit of doubt to the accused No.2. Accordingly point under reference answered in the Negative. 28. POINT NO.2 : For the aforesaid reason and discussion, I proceed to pass the following: ORDER Acting under section 255(1) of Cr.P.C. Accused No.2 are hereby Acquitted for the offences punishable U/s.500 of IPC . The bail bond executed by the accused No. 2 are stands cancelled. However, Accused No.2 shall execute personal bond of Rs.50,000/­ by undertaking to appear before the appellate Court, if any appeal is filed. (Dictated to the stenographer, script transcribed by her and then corrected directly on computer and then pronounced by me in open court on this the 31st of August 2020). (Balagopalakrishna) XXIV A.C.M.M., BENGALURU. 26 ANNEXURE Witnesses examined for the complainant: PW­1 : Seetharam PW­2 : M.S.Sanjeeva PW 3 : Lakshmipathi Documents marked for the complainant : Ex.P.1 is the Complaint Ex.P.2 is the office copy of the Legal Notice Ex.P.3 is the UCP receipt Ex.P.4 is the returned postal cover Ex.P.5 is the copy of the complaint given by complainant to Registrar of Co operative Societies Ex.P.6 is the portion of the written objection filed by the accused No.2 before the Joint Registrar of the Co operative society Ex.P.7 is the order sheet dtd: 24/4/08 of Joint Registrar of Co operative society Ex.P.8 is the cc of the Order of 3rd Addl.Bangalore Urban District Consumer Dispute Redressal Forum in complaint No.1895/07 dtd: 19/2/08 Ex.P.9 is the copy of the Bangalore Mirror Daily newspaper dtd: 25/8/07 Ex.P.10 is the copy of the complaint given by the complainant to Lokayuktha Ex.P.11 is the cc of the Order passed by the HHCK in 27 Crl.Pet.No.779/10 and 780/10 dtd: 15/7/10 Ex.P.12 is the cc of the complaint in PCR.NO.31074 (CC.No.11370/06) Ex.P.13 is the entire order sheet in CC.No.11370/06 Ex.P.14 is the cc of the complaint filed by one Channegowda before 9th ACMM Ex.P.15 is the cc of the order sheet in PCR.No.3954/12 Ex.P.16 is the cc of the FIR in Cr.No.96/12 Ex.P.17 is the copy of the Notice issued by Jnanabharathi police to the complainant Ex.P.18 is the Form­A filed by the complainant under Right to Information Rules 2005 to the Jnanabharathi police Ex.P.19 is the Postal receipt Ex.P.20 is the COP receipt Ex.P.21 is the returned postal cover Ex.P.22 is the cc of Order passed in PCR.1456/93 Ex.P.23 is the cc of the Order passed in CC.No.20337/10 Ex.P.24 is the copy of the charge made by Special Court for Economics in CC.No.554/01 dtd: 17/1/04 Ex.P.25 is the cc of the Order of HHCK in Crl.A.No.635/04 dtd: 28/9/10 Ex.P.26 is the copy of the Kannada Prabha News paper dtd: 03­04­10 Ex.P.27 is the cc of the order passed by HHCK in W.P.No.26985/14 (GM Police) dtd: 26/8/14 28 Ex.P.28 is the Endorsement issued by the Mahalakshmi layout police Ex.P.29 is the Legal opinion given by the Addl.Government Advocate on the order passed by the HHCK in W.P.No.26915/14 Materials marked for the complainant : NIL Witnesses examined for the accused: NIL Documents marked for the accused: Ex.D.1 is Lankesh Patrike weekly dtd: 5/10/05 is produced wherein an article has been mentioned saying that the complainant is a Psychopath. Ex.D.2 is the application submitted by the complainant to the Bar Council on 23/9/10 by mentioning the column No.15 as 'NO'. Ex.D.3­D.4 are the details of cases filed by the Mahalakshmi layout police against the complainant, Ex.D.5 is the order passed by the Karnataka State Bar Council, Ex.D.6 is the certified copy of the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner to open Rowdy Sheeter against the complainant. (Balagopalakrishna) XXIV A.C.M.M., BENGALURU.