Ashok Kumar Sharma vs . Chanderveer Singh (Complaint Case) on 30 May, 2013 IN THE COURT OF SH. NAVJEET BUDHIRAJA, METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE­04, SOUTH DISTRICT, NEW DELHI Ashok Kumar Sharma VS. Chanderveer Singh (complaint case) Complaint case no : 251/1 (16.11.2010) P. S. Ambedkar Nagar U/s 500 IPC JUDGMENT Unique ID No. of the case and : 02403R0321962004 Date of its institution : 31.7.2004 Name of the complainant : Sh. Ashok Kumar Sharma Name of the accused : Chander Veer Singh Offence complained of : Section 500 IPC Plea of accused : Not guilty Case reserved for orders : 29.4.2013 Final Order : ACQUITTED Date of Judgment : 30.5.2013 BRIEF STATEMENT OF FACTS FOR THE DECISION:­ 1. This is a complaint case filed by the complainant Sh. Ashok Kumar Sharma against the accused namely Chander Veer Singh for defamation u/s 499 / 500 Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short " IPC ") 2. Brief facts of the complainant is that the complainant was earlier called by the police of Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 1/10 PS Badarpur as the accused with his ill motives lodged false and frivolous complaints dated 28.11.2003 and 19.12.2003. However, later on, accused accepted his mistake. Even after realizing his mistake and giving in writing to the police that the accused is not interested in pursuing the complaint, the accused filed a complaint case and accordingly a case was registered being FIR no. 27/04 u/s 452 / 323 / 509 / 506 / 34 IPC at PS Ambedkar Nagar. In the abovesaid complaint, complainant and his son Vivek Sharma @ Bobby were made accused. However, they got anticipatory bail. After that, accused started showing the copy of the FIR to the known and unknown persons of complainant with the sole motive to malign and harm the reputation of the complainant in the eyes of public at large and the complainant from various persons came to know that in the FIR derogatory and defamatory language is contained against the complainant which the accused has written intentionally to harm the reputation of the complainant. 3. The complainant has examined himself as CW 1, Ms. Maya Sharma as CW 2, Ms. Nootan as CW 3 and Sh. Om Prakash as CW 4 u/s 200 Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short "the Code") and later on, on the basis of the examination of the complainant and other witnesses, the accused Chander Veer Singh was summoned vide order dated 26.3.2007 for offence u/s 499/500 IPC . Notice under the same sections was served upon him which he denied and claimed trial. 4. Complainant then got examined himself as CW 1 wherein he deposed that on 5.3.2003 Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 2/10 police came to him at around 11 pm in the night alleging that his son had quarreled with the wife of respondent Chander Veer Singh. He said to those police personnels that it was not in his knowledge and no such thing happened and he stated this to the police as his son was at home and he did not go outside the house which created an impression in his wife that he has not quarreled with any one. After that he went to the police station when police called him. He told the police that accused was his tenant for three years and no quarrel took place between his son and wife of the accused. On the next day, the matter was compromised by the police. Thereafter, the accused informed all his relatives about the dispute and quarrel between his son and his wife by telephone. After one year, the accused filed the police complaint in PS Badarpur alleging that he roam around in the lanes and bring his daughter alongwith him. He has shown the copies of the complaint to the people who lives in his locality. He was shocked to see that the allegations made upon his daughter. Thereafter, they made an allegation upon him that he will get the house of the accused demolished as he is employed in DDA. He also made an allegation upon him that he will get killed in a fake encounter. He also made a complaint against him in Kalkaji police station that he intimidated him. At that time, he was present at his house and informed to the police officials that the complaint was false. After enquiry they found the complaint false. The accused has made this rumor widespread that he booked him under Section 456 IPC and he will be sent to jail. He was cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 3/10 5. CW 2 Mrs. Maya Sharma deposed that on the date of incident her husband and son were not at home. Some of the police personnel came to her house. They said to her that her son and husband had altercation and scuffle with Chandra Virender Singh and they would take both her son and husband to police station. Those police personnels asked about her husband and son. She called them after making a call. On next day, they compromised the matter with Chandra Virender Singh in the police station. She compromised the matter because her husband was a Govt. Servant and she did not want any altercation. After around 8 months of this compromise, respondent ChandraVirender Singh has filed a case against them. They have to get bail in that case and faced various difficulties. This case gave them mental tension and harassment. She was cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. 6. CW 3 Mrs. Nootan deposed that she knew accused Chandraveer. He was the tenant of her brother Ashok Kumar. The relation between her brother and accused Chandraveer was good but later on became strained. She was told by her sister in law that her brother has given some money to the accused Chandraveer. Chandraveer used to meet her on her way because her house was near to him. The accused Chandraveer told to her that he has some dispute with Ashok Kumar and he will not let him go easily. She was cross examined by Ld. Counsel for the accused. 7. Accused was examined u/s 313 Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short "the Code) wherein accused submitted that the compromise was not honoured by the complainant Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 4/10 and therefore, a case had to be filed against his nefarious activities and the case was tried by a Court of proper jurisdiction and reached its logical conclusion. Accused has not lead any defence evidence. Matter was finally argued and this judgment is in pursuance of the trial and subsequent arguments. 8. Accused has been made to stand trial for offence punishable u/s 500 IPC . The allegations against him is that he lodged a complaint against the complainant which contained defamatory elements in para 5 of the complaint and also made it known to the public at large. In order to substantiate the allegations against the accused, complainant examined himself as CW 1. The relevant extract of his testimony is reproduced as below. "......After one year, the accused filed the police complaint in PS Badarpur alleging that I roam around in the lanes and bring my daughter alongwith me. He has shown the copies of the complaint to the people who lives in my locality. I shocked to see that the allegations made upon my daughter. Thereafter, they made an allegation upon me that I will get the house of the accused demolished as I am employed in DDA. He also made an allegation upon me that I will get killed in a fake encounter. He also made a complaint against me in Kalkaji police station that I intimidated him. At that time, he was present at my house and informed to the police officials that the complaint was false. After enquiry they found the complaint false. The accused has made this rumor widespread that he booked me under Section 456 IPC and he will be sent to jail...." Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 5/10 9. Complainant also relied upon documents Ex.CW1/A (colly) in support of his case. The stand of the accused is that the complaint filed by him against the complainant before the Court was true and correct in the sense that complainant alongwith his son had barged into his premises on 5.3.2003 and caused injuries to his wife. However, later on, with the intervention of the common friends and relatives a compromise was arrived at between the parties wherein accused person (complainant in the present case) tendered an apology in writing and promised not to repeat such an act in future. But complainant did not budge and continued to threaten the accused and his wife to get their house demolished by using his influence in DDA and also threaten to cause bodily harm to him and his family members, which then compelled the accused to file a formal complaint against the complainant. 10. Before deliberating upon the abovesaid contentions of both the parties, it would be apt to refer to the provisions of defamation as provided in section 499 and 500 IPC. 499 Defamation­ Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1­It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2­It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 6/10 company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3­An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4­No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 500 Punishment for defamation­ Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 11. The essence of the offence of defamation consists in its tendency to cause with description of pain which is felt by a person who knows himself to be the object of unfavourable sentiments of his fellow creatures and those inconvenience to which a person who is the object of such unfavourable sentiments is exposed. In the case titled as Sunil Akhya Vs. H.M. Jadwet AIR 1968 Cr.LJ 736, the three essential ingredients of the offence of defamation is provided as (i) making or publishing any imputation concerning any person; (ii) such imputations must have been made by words either spoken or intended to be read or by signs or by visible representation; (iii) such imputation must have been made with the intention to harm or with the knowledge or having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerned. Therefore, the intention to cause harm is the most essential "sine qua non" of an offence u/s 499 IPC. Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 7/10 12. The abovesaid principles mention one of the essential elements as intention to impute which means accusations against a person and which implies an allegation of fact and not merely an abuse. In the light of the abovesaid principles, now let us analyze the facts as well as the evidence adduced in the instant case. The grudge of the complainant is that accused has filed false police complaint against him wherein he has levelled certain derogatory and defamatory allegations against him which has lowered down his image in the public in as much as accused has also shown copies of the same to the people living in his locality. Although, complainant has failed to exhibit the said complaint in his evidence, still even if we assume that any such complaint was in fact made by the accused, still that would not tantamount to defamation of the complainant on the part of the accused. In the said complaint, accused has made allegations against the complainant that even after compromising the matter with him as regards the incident that took place on 5.3.2003 wherein complainant alongwith his son had barged into the premises of the accused and caused injuries to his wife, complainant continued to threaten him and his family with dire consequences which constrained him to file the complaint before the police. Complainant has not been able to prove that the said allegations were false or made with malafide intention to defame him or lower down his reputation in the society. Furthermore, complainant has not examined any person of his locality to whom accused is alleged to have shown the copies of the complaint. During the course of final arguments, it was inquired from Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 8/10 both the parties as to whether any action was taken by the concerned police station or the magistrate upon the complaint of the accused upon which it was revealed by both the parties that a full fledged trial took place upon the said complaint in which the complainant and his son were convicted by the concerned magistrate but later on, in the appeal the said conviction was reversed and both the complainant and his son were acquitted. Be that as it may, in order to prove its case against the accused it was incumbent upon the complainant to have placed on record the proceedings of the abovesaid case in which the complainant and his son were acquitted by the appellate Court. Those proceedings might have proved on record whether the complainant was falsely implicated at the hands of the accused and also whether the complaint was preferred by the accused with ill intention to lower the image of the complainant in the society. In the absence of any such proof on record, it is highly difficult to assume that the abovesaid complaint was not preferred by the accused in good faith. Complainant has also claimed in his cross examination that accused had an axe to grind against him as accused borrowed some money from the complainant which he was not returning. This statement of the complainant also does not seem to be credible for the reason that no such averment is found mentioned either in the complaint or in his examination in chief. 13. The testimonies of the remaining two complainant's witnesses i.e CW 2 Smt. Maya Sharma and CW 3 Ms. Nootan are also not of much help to the case of the Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 9/10 complainant. Testimony of these witnesses, although, shows that both complainant and the accused were not on good terms with each other but fails to show that the complainant was defamed in any manner by the accused. Accused was examined u/s 313 of the Code wherein all the incriminating evidence was put to him which he denied. He also stated that complainant and his son were angry with him as his son's marriage was arranged by him and dowry received was not adequate and not according to their choice, therefore, they started bearing grudge and enmity against him and his wife. 14. Having regard to the above discussion, it is abundantly clear that complainant has failed to prove the essential elements of the offence of defamation against the accused in as much as he has failed to prove satisfactorily and beyond reasonable doubt that accused has complained against him with ill intention of degrading his image in the society. Although, accused may be daggers drawn with the complainant but that alone is not sufficient to assume that because of that accused was driven to file false complaint against the complainant. Complainant has also failed to prove that accused had spread the information of implication of the complainant to his relatives or neighbours. Resultantly, accused stands exonerated for the offence u/s 500 IPC with which he is charged. Bail bonds stands discharged. He is set at liberty. Announced in the open court (Navjeet Budhiraja) on 30th May, 2013 Metropolitan Magistrate­04, South, New Delhi Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. Chanderveer Singh 10/10