Sri K. Kadiravel vs Smt. Madamma on 23 January, 2019 IN THE COURT OF THE LIX ADDL.CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE, BANGALORE CITY (CCH-60) Dated this the 23rd day of January 2019 PRESENT Sri B. B.Jakati, B.A., LL.M., LIX ADDL.CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE BANGALORE CITY Crl. Appeal No.434/2017 APPELLANT/S: Sri K. Kadiravel, S/o Late Kannayan, Aged about 44 years, R/at No.9, Revenue Land, Vysya Bank Colony, J.P. Nagara, 1st Phase, Bengaluru - 98. (By Sri Radha Krishna A.N., Advocate)) -Vs- RESPONDENT/S: Smt. Madamma, W/o Late Darmalingam, Aged about 55 years, R/at No.157, 15th Mai, 2nd Stage, Mahadeswaranagar, BTM Layout II Stage, Bengaluru - 76. (By Sri M.R.L., Advocate) 2 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 JUDGMENT This Criminal Appeal is filed under Section 374(3) of Cr.P.C. challenging the legality and correctness of the judgment of conviction and order of sentence passed by the 44th ACMM, Bengaluru in C.C.No.18553/2012 dated 25.02.2017. 2. The essential facts required for disposal of this appeal are that the respondent/complainant filed complaint under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. against the appellant/accused for the offence under Section 500 of IPC. In the complaint it has been alleged that the complainant belong to respectable family and residing at Mahadeswara Nagara, BTM Layout, Bengaluru, which is the reputed area in Bengaluru city. She married Dharmalingam about thirty years back as per Hindu Rites and Customs and from such marriage she got two sons by name Srinivas and Ramachandra. Both of them educated and under 3 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 employment. It has been further alleged that accused taken hand loan of Rs.3,00,000/- from the complainant on 15.10.2009 and in order to repay loan he issued cheque dated 15.04.2010 drawn on Vijaya Bank, Banashankari Branch, Bengaluru and that cheque came to be dishonoured on 16.04.2010 as "Account closed". Thereafter, the complainant issued legal notice to the accused demanding the cheque amount through registered post, which was served. After such notice, the accused given reply on 07.05.2010 through his Advocate. In that reply the accused has stated that the complainant is the kept mistress of one Subramani and he is none other than the neighbour and predecessor-in-title of him. It is also alleged in the reply that the complainant is the kept mistress of N. Subramani and therefore, she might have been seen the accused from past two decades. Through these statements, the accused has made statement of imputation and thereby defamed the complainant. It has been further alleged that after 4 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 knowing the imputation referred above, many people known to the complainant called her over the phone and expressed their bad opinion and thereby the reputation of the complainant has been lowered. The accused has made such statements with an intention to defame the complainant. On these grounds it has been stated that the accused has committed the offence of defamation. 3. The trial court took the cognizance of the offence, after recording the sworn statement issued process to the accused for the offence under Section 500 of IPC. The accused appeared before the trial court and denied the act of defamation. Therefore, in order to prove the guilt of the accused, the complainant examined herself as P.W.1, examined Smt. Rajamma as P.W.2 and got marked the documents at Ex.P.1 to P.4. The trial court examined the accused under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. The accused denied the 5 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 incriminating evidence. He has not adduced any evidence in his defence. 4. After hearing the argument of both sides, the trial court has held that the statements made in reply dated 07.05.2010 is defamatory statement and because of such statement the reputation of the complainant has been lowered and therefore, the accused has committed the offence under Section 500 of IPC. Accordingly, the trial court has convicted the accused for the offence under Section 500 of IPC and sentenced him to undergo S.I. for six months and shall pay fine of Rs.15,000/-, in default shall undergo further S.I. for two months. The trial court has also passed order to pay an amount of Rs.10,000/- as compensation to the complainant out of fine amount. Against this judgment of conviction and order of sentence, the present Appeal has been preferred. 6 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 5. The appeal was admitted and the LCRs have been secured. The complainant appeared through her counsel after service of notice. 6. The learned counsel for the accused has argued that reply notice at Ex.P.4 containing alleged imputation was sent to the Advocate of the complainant through registered post. That statement is in English language. The P.W.1 and 2 have admitted in the cross-examination that they are illiterates and therefore, both witnesses have not at all read the imputation and therefore, the reply itself does not constitute an offence under Section 499 of IPC. He has further argued that the Advocate who has issued reply notice at Ex.P.4 has not been examined by the complainant. Hence, such non- examination is fatal to the case of the complainant. His next argument is that the trial court after holding that the accused is guilty for the offence under Section 500 of IPC not considered 7 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 as to whether the accused is entitled for benefit under Section 360 of Cr.P.C. or Section 3 and 4 of Probation of Offenders Act. On these main grounds he has contended that the court below has committed error in convicting the accused for the offence under Section 500 and prayed to set aside such judgment. In support of his argument he placed reliance on the decisions reported in : (1) AIR 1958 Patna 445 (Mahender V/s Harnandan Prasad) ; (2) 1999 supreme Court Cases (Cri) 1046 (State Of Karnataka V/s Muddappa) ; (3) Cri.A.No. 669/03 (High Court Order) ; State By Banashankari Police V/s S.G.Rajendra Reddy, HCGP; (4) 1985 Cri L.J. (Noc-I) (KANT) {State of Karnataka. V/s Bhimappa and others}. 7. The learned counsel for the complainant has argued that Ex.P.4 / reply notice contains imputation against the complainant and the accused was required to examine the Advocate who issued the reply notice to show that he had not 8 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 instructed the Advocate to give reply and now the accused cannot contend that non-examination of Advocate who issued Ex.P.4 is fatal to the case o the complainant. He has argued that for the offence under Section 500 that too the offence committed in respect of character of a lady, the provisions of Section 360 of Cr.P.C. or the provisions of P.O. Act cannot be invoked. He has argued that reply notice at Ex.P.4 has been read over by the Advocate to the complainant and P.W.2 came to know the reply given by the accused when the accused pasted the copy in the surrounding of the house of the complainant and such evidence brought on record is sufficient to constitute the offence under Section 500 of IPC. On these grounds he justified the finding recorded by the trial court and prayed to dismiss the Appeal. In support of his argument he relied upon the decisions reported in (1) 2001 Cri.l.J 2571 {M.N. Damani V/s S.K.Sinha and others} and (2) Cri P No 2874/2008 {M.P. Neelakantaiah V/s H. Puttaiah}. 9 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 8. I have meticulously gone through with the material evidence on record and the finding recorded by the trial court. In order to decide the present appeal, the following points arise for my determination: 1. Whether the respondent/ complainant established beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant/accused made imputation in Ex.P.4 / reply notice intending to harm or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of herself and thereby committed the offence under Section 500 of IPC ? 2. Whether the trial court has committed error in law or on fact in convicting the accused for the offence under Section 500 of IPC? 3. Whether the accused is entitled for benefit under Section 360 of 10 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 Cr.P.C . or Section 4 of Probation of Offenders Act? 9. My findings to the above points are as under:- POINT No.1 :- In the Affirmative POINT No.2 :- In the Negative POINT No.3 :- In the Negative for the following:- REASONS 10. POINT No.1 AND 2 :- Both parties have admitted that they were known to each other prior to issuance of legal notice by the complainant to the accused on 04.05.2010 in respect of dishonour of cheque. The complainant has produced the certified copy of the legal notice dated 04.05.2010 in Ex.P.1, which shows that this notice has been issued by Sri M.R. Nanjunda gowda, Advocate for the complainant to the accused after dishonour of the cheque. The service of notice at Ex.P.1 is not disputed by the accused. 11 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 Ex.P.2 is the copy of the PCR No.21971/2010 filed by the complainant against the accused herein for the offence under Section 138 of N.I. Act after dishonour of the cheque bearing No.730845 dated 15.04.2010. Ex.P.3 is the certified copy of the cheque. The accused has not disputed filing of complaint at Ex.P.2 based on the cheque at Ex.P.3 against him by the complainant before 13th ACMM, Bengaluru. Therefore, these admitted facts and the records are sufficient to hold that the complainant presented the cheque at Ex.P.3, said to be issued by the accused which came to be dishonoured and therefore, she has issued the legal notice at Ex.P.1 and when the accused not paid the cheque amount she has filed complaint before the learned Magistrate for the offence under Section 138 of N.I. Act, wherein the accused appeared and contested the matter. 12 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 11. Ex.P.4 is the certified copy of the reply notice dated 07.05.2010 issued by Sri Satish Chandra, Advocate, Bengaluru to Sri M.R. Nanjunda Gowda, Advocate, Bengaluru. In this reply there is a reference that reply relates to legal notice produced at Ex.P.1. In Para No.2 and 3 of Ex.P.4, there is alleged imputation statement which reads as under: "My client has hearsay that your client is kept mistress of one Sri N. Subramani and he is none other than the neighbour and predecessor-in-title of my client. Such being the case the question of my client having transaction with your client is not at all sustainable. But since it is heard by my client that she is the kept mistress of Sri N. Subramani, she might have been my client from past two decades". 12. The P.W.1 has stated that the accused has made such imputation in the reply and such statement amounts to 13 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 defamation. In the evidence of P.W.1 and 2 it has been elicited that the accused made the statements that the complainant is the kept mistress of Sri N. Subramani and such statement amounts to imputation. The learned counsel for the accused has submitted that in order to constitute the offence, some more facts have to be proved by leading evidence that accused knew or ought to have known that Ex.P.4 probably be read by some person other than the complainant. He has argued that the evidence has to be brought on record to the effect that the imputation in Ex.P.4 has been communicated to some person or persons other than the complainant and such publication was either by the accused or as a result of such action on the part of the knowledge of the accused which likely to lead publication. Such evidence has not been produced by the complainant and therefore, the statement at Ex.P.4 spoken by P.W.1 and 2 does not constitute the offence under Section 500 of IPC. In view of this submission and the statement at Ex.P.4, 14 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 whether the statement at Ex.P.4 constitute the offence under Section 500 of IPC is to be decided. 13. In order to decide the offence of defamation, it is necessary to refer definition of defamation defined under Section 499 of IPC which reads under: 499. Defamation.--Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. 15 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 14. The Hon'ble Patna High Court in the decision reported in AIR 1958 Patna 445 in Para No.7 held as under: "In order to succeed in the case the plaintiff has to establish that the defendant knew or ought to have known that the letter would probably be read by some person other than the plaintiff. In other words, the plaintiff must prove that the defamation had been published, i.e., communicated to some person or persons' other than the plaintiff himself and that such publication was either by the defendant himself or as a result of such action on his part which to his knowledge was likely to lead to publication. It seems well settled that mere writing of words howsoever defamatory they may be, to a person intended to be read by him & not intended to be read by a third person, does not constitute an 16 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 offence of defamation and does not make a man liable to pay damages in a Civil action. It is necessary to show that the writer intended his defamatory writing to be read by person or persons other than the addressee or at least he ought to have known that they were likely to be so read by a third person or persons. In absence of such a proof it cannot be held that the writer would be liable for defamation simply because the writing got publication." 15. The definition under Section 499 of IPC and the principle laid down by the Hon'ble Patna High Court show that in order to constitute an offence of defamation under Section 499 of IPC, the complainant herein is required to prove that the accused has made the imputation in Ex.P.4 intended to be read by the person against whom the imputation was made and 17 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 others with intention to harm or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the complainant. Further, the complainant is required to establish that the accused had knowledge at the time of making imputation at Ex.P.4 that such statement would probably be read by some person other than the complainant. Whether such evidence has been brought by the complainant is to be appreciated. 16. In Ex.P.4 it has been stated that the complainant is the kept mistress of one Sri N. Subramani. The statement in Ex.P.4 is said to be made by the accused as per the statements made by P.W.1 and 2. The P.W.1 and 2 in their evidence have stated that the accused has made the imputation by saying that the complainant is the kept mistress of N. Subramani. The complainant admittedly is a Widow and her marriage was solemnized about thirty years back prior to 18 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 filing of complainant. She got two sons who born in the year 1980 and 1987. Both sons are employed and grown up. The complainant has stated that she is from respectable family. These facts have not been denied by the accused. It is not the case of the accused that he made the statement at Ex.P.4 and such statement is true statement and it is coming within any of the exceptions under Section 499 of IPC. Therefore, the statement at Ex.P.4 amounts to imputation. 17. The reply at Ex.P.4 has been sent by Sri Satish Chandra, Advocate to the Advocate of complainant. This reply has been produced by the complainant in the complaint filed under Section 138 of N.I. Act, which has not been disputed. Prior to Ex.P.4, the complainant issued notice at Ex.P.1 and there is a reference of Ex.P.1 in Ex.P.4. The complaint in PCR No.21971/2010 was filed on 27.05.2010. The present complaint was filed on 17.09.2010. These events and 19 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 the records produced in previous complaint probabilize that the accused after receipt of notice at Ex.P.1 got issued reply at Ex.P.4 on 07.05.2010. Such evidence is sufficient to show that on the authorization given by the accused, his Advocate Sri Satish Chandra issued reply at Ex.P.4. To prove that Ex.P.4 was issued on the instruction of accused, there is no necessity to examine Sri Satish Chandra. Therefore, I hold that Ex.P.4 has been issued by the accused and it is binding on the accused. Now the accused cannot disown the statements made at Ex.P.4. 18. At the time of issuing the reply at Ex.P.4, the accused had knowledge that such reply shall be produced in the complaint to be filed for the offence under Section 138 of N.I. Act. He was also having knowledge that if such reply at Ex.P.4 is produced before court of law, it would be open to the public to read the contents of Ex.P.4, which contains imputation 20 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 against the complainant. If anybody reads Ex.P.4, the reputation of the complainant will definitely lowered and such fact was within the knowledge of accused when reply at Ex.P.4 was issued to the complainant. The reply at Ex.P.4 has been produced before the court of law prior to filing of present complaint. So, Ex.P.4/statement was put in public domain which contains the imputation against the complainant. The production of Ex.P.4 in PCR No.21971/2010 can be seen by the fact that from such case only the certified copy has been issued. Therefore, Ex.P.4 was made public and the accused had intention or knowledge that it would be made public by producing before the court. 19. The P.W.1 and 2 have stated that they are illiterate and they cannot read and write English language. Ex.P.4 is in English language and therefore, they have not read it. But the P.W.1 has stated that her Advocate read over Ex.P.4 to her 21 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 and therefore, she came to know the imputation made by the accused. The P.W.2 has stated that there was financial transaction between the complainant and the accused and the accused had quarreled with the complainant. She has stated that accused told her that complainant is having illicit relationship with Subramani. She has also stated that the accused prepared the notice containing the imputation and it was pasted to her house and also house of others in the locality. From such affixture of notices and the statement made by the accused in her presence, she came to know that accused has made the statement that complainant is having illicit relationship with Subramani. The statement of P.W.2 that Accused affixed the copy of imputation has not been discredited in the cross-examination. The P.W.2 has also stated that even though she does not know reading and writing, she came to know the imputation from the accused and from others who read the notices affixed. These statements made 22 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 by P.W.1 and 2 clearly show that even though they are not knowing English language, in which Ex.P.4 statement was made, some body read such statement to them and they came to know the contents of imputation in Ex.P.4. Their evidence also show that, apart form P.W.1 and 2, the people of locality where the complainant is residing also read the imputation made by the accused. 20. The P.W.2 has stated that after knowing the allegation made by the accused, she developed bad opinion about the complainant and she stopped to talk with the complainant. This statement is consistent. The P.W.2 was the friend of P.W.1 prior to imputation, which is not disputed by the accused. Therefore, the statement made by P.W.2 clearly show that because of the imputation the reputation of the complainant has been lowered. All these facts show that the accused while sending reply at Ex.P.4 not only intended to be 23 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 read by the complainant, but it was intended to be read by the third person. Apart from that he has pasted the copy of Ex.P.4 to the neighbouring house of complainant including the P.W.2. The P.W.2 and neighbours read the imputation concerning to the complainant. Because of reading of such imputation by P.W.2 and public, the reputation of complainant has been lowered. Therefore, through cogent evidence the complainant has established beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has made imputation in Ex.P.4 with an intention that it should be read by not only the complainant but also the third parties. Such evidence is sufficient to constitute the offence under Section 499 of IPC. Thus, I hold that the learned Trial Judge has rightly given his finding that the accused is guilty for the offence under Section 500 of IPC. I do not find any reasons to set aside such finding. Hence, these points are answered accordingly. 24 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 21. POINT No.3 :- The punishment prescribed for the offence under Section 500 of IPC is simple imprisonment for term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both. Therefore, it is a summons case. The Trial Judge tried the case as summons case. The Trial Judge is Metropolitan Magistrate and he has got jurisdiction to impose fine exceeding Rs.10,000/- and sentence of imprisonment up to seven years. By exercising such discretion the Trial Judge has imposed the punishment of imprisonment and fine. Section 255(2) of Cr.P.C. provides that if the Magistrate does not proceed in accordance with provisions of Section 325 or Section 360 of Cr.P.C., if he finds the accused guilty, shall pass the sentence. So, the Magistrate if comes to conclusion that the accused committed the offence in summons case, he has to decide whether there are any grounds to invoke Section 360 of Cr.P.C. Even the Magistrate is required to invoke Section 3 or 4 of Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 if he finds the accused 25 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 guilty in criminal case. The learned Magistrate after holding the accused guilty for the offence under Section 500 of IPC not invoked either Section 360 of Cr.P.C. or Section 3 or 4 of Probation of Offenders Act . Even he has not given any reasons as to whether the accused is entitled for benefit provided under those provisions of law. The duty cast on the Magistrate is to see whether the facts and circumstances of the case are sufficient to extend benefit under Section 360 of Cr.P.C. or Section 3 and 4 of Probation of Offenders Act before sentencing the accused. He has jurisdiction even under Section 360 of Cr.P.C. and Section 3 and 4 of Probation of Offenders Act either to apply or not to apply, but he has to give reasons. Such exercise has not been taken up by the learned Magistrate. However, that fact is not a ground to set aside the judgment of conviction and order of sentence. The Appellate Court can see whether the accused is entitled for benefit under those provisions while deciding the appeal. Therefore, I am of 26 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 the opinion that in this Appeal, the court has to decide judiciously as to whether the accused is entitled for benefit under those provisions of law. 22. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported in 1999 supreme Court Cases (Cri) 1046 has held that benefit of Section 360 of Cr.P.C. and Section 4 of P.O. Act, 1958 could be given to the accused who found guilty for the offence under Section 304 Part-II of IPC . The Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka in Crl.Appeal No.669/2003 has extended the benefit of Section 4 of P.O. Act to the accused who was convicted for the offence under Section 392 of IPC. The Hon'ble High Court again in the decision reported in 1985 Cri. L.J. (Noc-I) (KANT) has extended the benefit of Section 360 of Cr.P.C. to he accused, who was held guilty for the offence under Section 325 of IPC. In the decision reported in 2010 Cri.L.J.(NOC) 865, the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka 27 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 has extended the benefit of Section 4 of P.O.Act to the accused who was held guilty for the offence under Section 354 of IPC. 23. Section 360 of Cr.P.C. provides that "when any person not under twenty- one years of age is convicted of an offence punishable with fine only or with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, or when any person under twenty- one years of age or any woman is- convicted of an offence not punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and no previous conviction is proved against the offender, if it appears to the Court before which he is convicted, regard being had to the age, character or antecedents of the offender, and to the circumstances in which the offence was committed, that it is expedient that the offender should be released on probation of good conduct, the Court may, instead of sentencing him at once to any punishment, direct that he be released on his entering into a bond with or without sureties, to appear and receive 28 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 sentence when called upon during such period (not exceeding three years) as the Court may direct and in the meantime to keep the peace and be of good behaviour. We can find similar provision under Section 3 of P.O. Act which provides that when any person is found guilty of having committed an offence punishable with imprisonment for not more than two years, or with fine, or with both, if the court finds that it has expedient to release him on probation on good conduct." 24. Therefore, in order to invoke Section 360 of Cr.P.C. or Section 3 of P.O. Act, the court must satisfy that it has expedient to release the accused on probation of good conduct looking to the facts and circumstances of the case. Whether in the present case warrants releasing the accused on probation of good conduct is to be looked into. 25. The complainant was aged 50 years when the complaint was filed. She is mother of two young boys. The 29 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 children are serving in Public Office. The complainant lost her husband when the imputation was made. The complainant has established that she had reputation in the society. Even her children are having reputation in the society. When the complainant demanded the amount shown in the cheque bounced issued by the accused, the accused instead of denying the liability gone to the extent of making defamatory statement against the widow. The statement of imputation is regarding the character of a woman. The accused has stated that she is kept mistress of Sri Subramani. Such statement will spoil entire career of women in Indian Society. The accused was aged about 38 years when such imputation was made and he was well grown up, he was knowing the consequences of statement made by him. Having regard to the nature of the imputation made by the complainant in respect of very character of widow, I am of the opinion that it is not expedient to release the accused on probation of good conduct either under 30 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 Section 36o of Cr.P.C. or under Section 3 of P.O. Act. For these reasons which was not recorded by the learned Magistrate, I hold that the accused has to be sentenced and accordingly, the trial court has rightly sentenced the accused for the offence under Section 500 of IPC. Accordingly, I answer this point and proceed to pass the following: ORDER The Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374(3) of Cr.P.C. is hereby dismissed. Send the copy of the Judgment along with the records to the lower court. (Dictated to the Judgment-writer, transcribed by her, corrected, signed and then pronounced by me in the open court on this the 23rd day of January, 2019). (B.B. Jakati) LIX Addl. C.C. & Sessions Judge, BANGALORE CITY. 31 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017 ORDER The Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374(3) of Cr.P.C. is hereby dismissed. Send the copy of the Judgment along with the records to the lower court. (B.B. Jakati) LIX Addl. C.C. & Sessions Judge, BANGALORE CITY. 32 Crl.Ap.No.434/2017