Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs . Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 1 Of 12 on 29 March, 2023 IN THE COURT OF SHRI KAPIL GUPTA METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-07, PATIALA HOUSE COURTS NEW DELHI DISTRICT: NEW DELHI Ct Case No. 19256/2016 DR. NASIR SUBHAN .......... Complainant Versus 1. MD. UMER FARIDI 2. SH. ANIS 3. MD. RAFI 4. MD. ALI 5. SH. JAMIL AHMAD 6. SH. ABDUL RAHEEM 7. SH. SALIM MIRZA .......... Accused Persons JUDGMENT A Date of Institution 11.09.2001 B Offence Charged U/s 500/501/34 IPC C Plea of accused Accused pleaded not guilty D Order Reserved on 23.01.2023 E Date of Pronouncement 29.03.2023 Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 1 of 12 F Final Order Acquittal 1. In brief, facts of the case as alleged by the complainant are that he is a doctor and his father is an Aalim-e-deen and has been performing imamat in Masjid Dargah Abdul Salam and is engaged in services for unity and integrity of the nation. It is alleged that the accused are indulged in illegally and forcibly occupying and grabbing the lands and buildings adjacent to the mosque and the Dargah and are also defiling the sanctity of the mosque and wakf properties. It is further alleged that the complainant's father raised objections to such activities upon which the accused persons became hostile. It is submitted that the accused filed/submitted a false and baseless letter dated 13/12/2000 (hereinafter referred to as "letter in issue") to Sh. Vidyasagar Rao, Minister of State for Home affairs, Government of India which was printed on the letterhead of accused No. 1 and signed by accused No. 2 to 7. It is further submitted that it has been written in such letter that the complainant and his father and brothers have illegally occupied some of the rooms adjacent to the mosque and are involved with antisocial elements which is against the interest of the nation and our motherland and further, father of the complainant has also been labelled as "Gang Leader". It is further alleged that the accused persons circulated and pasted the above letter in localities having sizeable members of Muslim community around the mosque and with the intention to malign the complainant and his family members knowing that such allegations are false and defamatory in nature and would result in adverse aspersion on the reputation and practice of the complainant and the family members and has also lowered their reputation in the eyes of the public in general and Muslim community in particular and have committed offences punishable Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 2 of 12 under Section 500 / 501 / 120 B IPC. 2. In the pre-summoning evidence, complainant examined himself as CW 1 and stated that on the last Friday of December 2000, a letter containing false/baseless and defamatory allegations against him and his family members were being circulated by all accused. He stated that it was written in the letter that complainant and his family members are involved in antisocial activity and antinational activity and the complainant's father has been specifically mentioned in the letter as a "Gang Leader". It was further stated that the defamatory letter dated 13/12/2000 Ex. CW 1/A was printed on the letter head of accused No. 1 and was addressed to Sh. Vidyasagar Rao, Union Minister and the accused persons in furtherance of common conspiracy, circulated and pasted such letter with intention to defame him and his family members and circulation of this letter had lowered his reputation and that of his family members in the eyes of the society. He stated that he had sent a legal notice dated 26/03/2001 through his advocate Ex. CW 1/B to the accused. 3. Sh. Arif Subhan was examined as CW 2 who stated that on the last Friday of December, 2000 he was sitting in the masjid and Khurshid came with a letter and Mohd. Umar came and told him about what had happened outside the Masjid. He stated that all the accused were circulating letters and telling that Imam Sahib is a Desh Drohi and engaged in antisocial activities and is a gang leader and letter Ex. CW1/A was handed over to him. He further stated that he came outside the mosque and saw that all the accused were circulating the said letters and were telling community people to not attend the prayer when imam sahib was reading the namaz. He further stated that due to such letter and propagation by the accused persons, reputation of his father and family members has been lowered. He Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 3 of 12 further stated that accused No. 1 to 6 have written the letter. 4. Sh. Khurshid was examined as CW 3 who stated that on the last Friday of the December, 2000 he saw some person circulating letter Ex. CW 1/A and raising slogans that Imam Sahib is a desh drohi and involved in antisocial activities and is a gang leader and he handed over such letter to Arif Subhan. He stated that due to such letter, the reputation of Imam Sahib and his family members was lowered in the eyes of the society and before him. He stated that accused No. 1 to 6 committed such offence. 5. Sh. Mohd. Umar was examined as CW 4 who stated that on last Friday of December, 2000 he saw some person circulating and propagating a letter Ex. CW 1/A stating deshdrohi Imam and his family members and that they are involved in antisocial activities and Imam Sahib is a gang leader. He stated that the circulation of this letter has lowered the reputation of Imam Sahib and his family in the eyes of society and in his eyes. 6. All accused were summoned for offences punishable under Section 50 / 501 read with Section 120 B IPC. As per order of the court dated 23/11/2011, the present case was dismissed as withdrawn qua accused No. 2. Notice was framed under Section 500 / 501 read with Section 120 B IPC against remaining accused to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 7. Thereafter, the complainant examined himself as CW-1 in post summoning evidence, wherein he adopted his version as recorded in pre summoning evidence in the post summoning evidence as well. In his cross- examination he admitted that Ex. CW1/A was not prepared in his presence and none of the persons as mentioned in such document signed in his Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 4 of 12 presence and he further cannot say as to who prepared such document, however, voluntarily stated that the same was distributed by the accused persons. He further stated that he has not seen the accused persons distributing the letter and came to know about such fact from his brother who was present at the time of distribution of the letter. 8. Thereafter, Sh. Umar Mohammad was examined as CW-2, wherein he adopted his version as recorded in pre summoning evidence in the post summoning evidence as well. In his cross-examination he stated that he had not seen any person drafting/preparing the letter Ex. CW1/A and he had handed over the same to Aarif Subhan at 2 PM. 9. Thereafter, Sh. Khurshid was examined as CW-3, wherein he adopted his version as recorded in pre summoning evidence in the post summoning evidence as well. In his cross-examination he admitted that the incident was not committed on 13/12/2000 and voluntarily stated that the same was committed on the last Friday of December, 2000. 10. Thereafter, Sh. Arif Subhan was examined as CW-4, wherein he adopted his version as recorded in pre summoning evidence in the post summoning evidence as well. In his cross-examination he admitted that he has not seen anyone signing Ex. CW1/A and the same was dated as of the last Friday of December, 2000. He further admitted that Ex. CW 1/A was not given to him by accused No. 1 to 6. 11. The post summoning evidence was closed and the statement of all remaining accused under Section 313 read with Section 281 Cr PC was recorded. The accused did not lead defence evidence. It is pertinent to mention that accused No. 1 had expired during the pendency of the trial. Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 5 of 12 12. I have heard the arguments put forth by the Ld. Counsel for the complainant and by Ld. Counsel for the accused and have given my thoughtful consideration to the same. I have also perused the material available on record. 13. Ld. Counsel for the complainant argued that complainant has proved his case beyond reasonable doubt and there is sufficient material on record to prove the guilt of the accused. It was argued that the accused persons had criminally defamed the complainant and his family members which has caused loss of their reputation in the society. It was prayed that the accused be convicted. 14. Per contra, Ld. Counsel for the accused argued that the none of the witness had seen the accused preparing or signing the letter in issue Ex. CW 1/A. It was further argued that case of the complainant is full of contradictions and complainant has failed to prove the case beyond reasonable doubt and accordingly accused be given benefit of doubt and be acquitted of all the charges. 15. Section 499 IPC reads as follows: Section 499 . Defamation.--Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1.--It may amount to defamation to impute anything Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 6 of 12 to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.--It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.--An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.--No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgrace- ful. 14. Further, Section 500 IPC reads as follows: Section 500 . Punishment for defamation.--Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 15. Further, Section 501 IPC reads as follows: Section 501 . Printing or engraving matter known to be defamatory.--Whoever prints or engraves any matter, knowing or having good reason to believe that such matter is defamatory of any person, shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 7 of 12 16. It has been held in judgement of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the case titled as Standard Chartered Bank v. Vinay Kumar Sood , 2009 SCC OnLine Del 227 as follows: "7. For an offence of defamation as defined under Section 499 IPC, three essential ingredients are required to be fulfilled:-- (i) Making or publishing any imputation concerning any person; (ii) Such imputation must have been made by words either spoken or intended to be read or by signs or by visible representations. (iii) The said imputation must have been made with the intention to harm or with knowledge or having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerned. 8. Thus, it is clear that intention to cause harm is the most essential sine qua non for an offence under Section 499 IPC. An offence punishable under Section 500 IPC requires blameworthy mind and is not a statutory offence requiring no mens rea." 17. The present case has been filed against accused No. 1 to accused No. 7 stating that they had filed/submitted a false and baseless letter dated 13/12/2000 to Sh. Vidyasagar Rao, Minister of State for Home affairs, Government of India and such letter was printed on the letter head of accused No. 1 and has been signed by accused No. 2 to 7 and such letter has false, malicious and defamatory allegations against the complainant and his family members. It was further stated that such letter was Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 8 of 12 circulated and pasted in localities having sizeable members of Muslims and around the mosque and the dargah. 18. The complainant in his cross examination has specifically admitted that the letter was not prepared in his presence and none of the accused signed in his presence. Moreover in his cross-examination he admitted that he was not present on the spot at the time of distribution of the letter in issue and he merely came to know about the alleged letter from his brother Aarif. Thus, it can be observed that the complainant is not an eyewitness of the alleged act of the accused persons and at best, his testimony can be regarded as hearsay evidence. Since, the complainant is not an eyewitness of the alleged incident, his testimony is wholly immaterial to decide the allegations against the accused in the facts and circumstances of the present case. 19. CW 2 Arif Subhan in his evidence had also stated that the accused persons were circulating the letter in issue and telling the community people to not attend the prayer when Imam Sahib was reading the namaz prayer. The said witness has not mentioned that the accused persons had signed the document. It is pertinent to mention that merely telling the community people to not attend the prayer when Imam Sahib was reading the namaz prayer is not per se defamatory. He merely stated that accused No. 1 to 6 had written the letter in issue, however, it could not be proved beyond reasonable doubt as to how accused No. 1 to 6 had written the letter. It is pertinent to mention that the letter is dated 13/12/2000, however, CW 2 only saw the circulation of the letter on the last Friday of December, 2000. It needs no mention that 13/12/2000 cannot be the last Friday of the month of December in the year 2000. Thus, it could not be Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 9 of 12 proved by the testimony of CW 2 that the accused persons had prepared and signed the letter issue. 20. CW 3 Shri Khurshid in his examination has also not stated that the accused persons had prepared or signed the letter in issue. He merely stated that accused No. 1 to 6 were circulating the letters and raising slogans that Iman Sahib is a deshdrohi and involved in antisocial activities and is a gang leader. Similar testimony has been led by CW 4. 21. It is an undisputed fact that the letter in issue is dated 13/12/2000, however, the complainant and the witnesses came to know about the same on the last Friday of the month of December in the year 2000. Since, the complainant and the witnesses came to know about the existence of the letter on the last Friday of the month of December in the year 2000, it is unconscionable to believe that they had seen the accused persons prepare and sign such letter which is dated 13/12/2000. Even otherwise, as per the deposition of all witnesses, none had seen the accused preparing or signing the letter in issue. Thus, a grave suspicion is casted over the deposition of the complainant and the witnesses. 22. In view of the above, it can be observed that none of the witnesses could prove that the letter was written or signed by the accused persons and the contention raised on behalf of the complainant that the accused persons are liable as they had prepared and signed the letter in issue is baseless and thus, rejected. However, the issue which needs consideration is whether the accused persons are liable for the alleged offences by having circulated the letters in issue. For addressing the issue, reliance is placed on the judgement of the Hon'ble High Court of Madras in the case titled as S.M.Govindasami Vs. K.P.Arumugam & Ors., Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 10 of 12 Crl.O.P.No.1889 of 2018 and Crl.M.P.Nos.720 & 721 of 2018 wherein the question before the court was as follows: "5.The only issue that arises for consideration in the present case is as to whether a magazine which has already been published and is distributed by another person will make such distributor also an accused punishable for the offence of defamation." It was held by the Hon'ble High Court as follows: "8.In the present case, admittedly the publication was made by A1 to A3 in a magazine. Once the magazine comes into the market and it gets distributed, thereafter, all those persons who are involved in the distribution of the magazine cannot be roped in as accused persons for the offence of defamation. Such distributors have nothing to do with the alleged defamatory publication. The 1st respondent had an axe to grind against the petitioner because of the previous rivalry between both of them and therefore, he has been unnecessarily added as an accused by making a vague allegation that the petitioner was distributing the magazine published by A1 to A3. This allegation does not make out an offence of defamation against the petitioner." 23. In view of the above judgement, it can be observed that even if it is assumed that accused persons were circulating the letter in issue, they cannot be held liable for the offences alleged, merely by circulating the letter in issue. Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 11 of 12 24. It is further pertinent to mention that the allegation of the complainant was that the accused persons had signed on the letter in issue, however, the complainant did not take any steps to get the signatures of the accused compared with the signatures on the alleged letter by either requesting the court to send the letter in issue to FSL for comparison with the signatures of the accused persons nor did the complainant bother to get the signatures compared by any private expert. This again raises suspicion over the case of the complainant and it can be observed that the complainant has failed to prove his case beyond reasonable doubt. 25. In view of the evidence adduced, documents put forth and arguments advanced by the parties and further in view of the above discussion, the court is of the considered opinion that no incriminating evidence could be brought by the complainant against the accused to prove the fact that the accused had prepared and signed on the letter in issue and further failed to establish the ingredients of offence alleged against the accused in the present matter beyond reasonable doubt. It has been further observed that mere circulation of defamatory material does not constitute the alleged offence and thus, accused Md. Rafi, Md. Ali, Sh. Jamil Ahmad, Sh. Abdul Raheem and Sh. Salim Mirza are not guilty of offence punishable U/s 500/501/120 B IPC and accordingly, are hereby acquitted for the offence punishable under Section 500 / 501 / 120 B IPC. At the sake of repetition, it is mentioned that accused no. 1 had expired during pendency of the trial and proceedings qua accused no. 2 were withdrawn by the complainant. Announced in the (Kapil Gupta) court on 29.03.2023 Metropolitan Magistrate - 07 New Delhi District, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi Ct Cases 19256/2016 Dr. Nasir Subhan vs. Mohd. Umer Faridi & Ors. Page 12 of 12