The Kangra CoôÙOperative Bank Ltd vs Sh Mangat Ram Sharma on 15 November, 2014 1 IN THE COURT OF MS. SHAIL JAIN ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE/SPECIAL JUDGE NDPS 02 (CENTRAL) DELHI Crl. R. NO. 22/14 The Kangra CoôÙOperative Bank Ltd having its Head Office at CôÙ29, Community Centre Pankha Road, Janakpuri New Delhi through its Director Sh Suresh Parashar. ........... Revisionist Vs 1. Sh Mangat Ram Sharma 230/27, Railway Colony Gali No. 9, DelhiôÙ92. 2. Sh Sudharshan Kumar Sharma EôÙ99, Vishwakarma Colony M.B Road, New Delhi. 3. Sh Kuljeet Walia H. No 3, Block D Street AôÙ1, Ratiya Marg Sangam Vihar, New DelhiôÙ62. 4. The State (Govt of NCT of Delhi) .......RESPONDENT Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 1 of 10 pages 2 DATE OF INSTITUTION : 18.07.2014 DATE OF JUDGMENT : 15.11.2014 J U D G M E N T 1. The present criminal revision petition u/s 397 / 399 Cr.P.C is preferred against order dated 23/04/2014 passed by Sh R K Pandey, Ld Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi whereby the accused persons i.e respondents no. 1 to 3 herein, have been discharged. Short point involved in the present revision petition is whether the complaint filed by the complainantôÙ revisionist herein against the respondent herein u/s 500 IPC was maintainable in view of provisions of section 199 Cr.P.C & Section 121 of Delhi CoôÙOP Societies Act. Secondly whether the Ld Trial Court has rightly applied the provisions of section 199 Cr.P.C and section 121 of Delhi Co OP Societies Act or not. 2. Brief facts leading to the present revision, as per revisionist are that complainant/petitioner filed a complaint for defamation u/s 499 / 500 IPC against respondent no. 1 to 3 who claimed to have been the President, Vice President and General Secretary of the Association of Consumers of Kangra Co OP Bank Ltd respectively, for carrying out defamatory propaganda by distributing pamphlets/handout containing defamatory material against the petitioner bank amongst the members of the complainant bank and public. Vide order dated 02.11.2007 Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 2 of 10 pages 3 respondent no 1 to 3 were served by Ld Trial Court. Pre charge evidence was led by the complainant. Thereafter respondent no. 3 moved an application on the issue of maintainability of complaint which was dismissed by Ld Trial Court on 31.05.2013. Vide order dated 23.04.2014, Ld Trial Court discharged all the accused persons ie respondent no 1 to 3. 3. Now the revisionist has challenged the order on the following grounds: a) That order of Ld Trial Court is against the facts as well as law. b) That the impugned order passed by Ld Trial Court is based upon conjectures and surmises. c) That Ld Trial Court has no power to reverse the findings of facts by Ld Predecessor. On one hand Ld Trial Court dismissed the application of accused no 3 on 31.05.2013 that the court had no power to review its own order and on the other hand Ld Trial Court discharged all accused persons. with these and similar grounds revisionist has prayed for setting aside the order passed by Ld Trial Court. 4. I have heard arguments from Ld counsel for the revisionist and Ld counsel for respondent. 5. On behalf of the revisionist, Sh Rajiv Taneja, Ld counsel has argued that Ld Trial Court has discharged the accused persons i.e. present revisionists on two technical grounds: firstly that Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 3 of 10 pages 4 complaint is hit by section 199 Cr.P.C and secondly as per section 121 Delhi Co OP Societies Act, no cognizance could have been taken without the sanction of Registrar. Ld counsel for revisionist was of the opinion that since the respondentôÙaccused have tried to defame the management committee , therefore, in fact, they have raised allegations against the bank and its working, hence they have tried to lower the image of the bank itself, therefore, complaint filed by the bank was maintainable and provisions of section 199 Cr.P.C are not attracted. 6. Further, it was also argued by Ld counsel for revisionist that provisions of section 121 Delhi Co OP Societies Act does not apply as no case has been filed under the provisions of Delhi Co OP Societies Act but the bank ie the registered society has filed the complaint under the provisions of Indian Penal Code against the defamation, caused by its members, hence provisions of section 121 Delhi Co OP Societies Act as well as section 199 Cr.P.C are not attracted in the present case, therefore, impugned order should be set aside. It was also contended by Ld counsel for revisionist that after summoning order was passed against accused persons, an application was moved by respondent no 3 challenging the summoning order, but the same was dismissed by Ld Trial Court on the point that Ld Trial Court has no power to review its order. By passing order Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 4 of 10 pages 5 of discharge on 23.04.2014 Ld Trial Court has actually reviewed its order of summoning, hence order is liable to be set aside. 7. On the other hand, respondents have filed written arguments. Respondent No. 3 has also submitted that since the respondent are also the members of the bank ie Kanga Co OP Bank, therefore, if the present complaint as filed by the bank is to be considered as to have been filed by the members, then it would make the situation impractical, as the case will then be deemed to have been filed by the respondents (being members of Bank) against themselves. Therefore, it was argued and submitted by respondents that impugned order does not suffer from any infirmity and should be confirmed. 8. I have considered the arguments submitted by Ld counsel for the revisionist and considered the written arguments along with judgments placed on record on behalf of the respondentôÙ accused. 9. Present revision has been filed against the order dated 23.4.14. After duly considering the impugned order, provisions of law and submissions of Ld counsel for revisionist and respondent themselves, I am of the opinion that revision as filed by the revisionist bank is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed. As per provisions of law, order of discharge passed in the summon cases has effect of acquittal of accused persons and Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 5 of 10 pages 6 as per the judgments passed by Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in many cases, no revision lies to the court of Sessions and only the appeal could have been filed. 10. In case Crl R Petition No. 440/2000 titled as M/S T Azeerur Rehman and Co vs M/s Super Supplies (date of decision ôÙ16.07.2007) Hon'ble High Court has considered the case of Raja Ram vs Principal Sudarshan Singh MKHS School 1981 Cr.L.J 1469. In the case of Raja Ram (mentioned above) Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court has held that: " The code envisages a few kinds of trial. Comparison of trials in warrant case and summons case would be useful to spell out the spirit underlying S. 254 of the Code. It would be noticed that in trial of a warrant case section 244 of the Code warrants that the prosecution must produce all evidence in support of it. Under section 245 of the Code the magistrate is required to consider it and if he finds that no case has been made out against the accused, which if unrebutted, would warrant his conviction, the Magistrate can discharge him, without hearing the accused or taking his evidence. In a trial of summons case the Magistrate u/s 254 is required to hear the prosecution and take all such evidence as may be produced in support of it, and also to hear the accused and take all such evidence as he produced in his defence. It Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 6 of 10 pages 7 is then that section 255 of the Code authorises the magistrate, upon taking the evidence referred to in section 254 , to pronounce the accused guilty and sentence him or to acquit him. In either situation the prosecution would first have to prove by its own evidence that accusation against the accused, if unrebutted by him, stands substantiated beyond all reasonable doubt. But if the prosecution itself is unreliable and cannot warrant by itself conviction of the accused, the accused may not open his mouth and not produce his evidence altogether. The mere ritual in the instant case of asking the accused formally, whether he wanted to be heard and produce his defence evidence, need not have been observed as it would not have served any useful purpose. The prosecution case taken as a whole was not found worthy of even formally being put in an accusation in the form of charge to the accused. Thus the conclusion is inescapable that that order of discharge passed has to be read as an order of acquittal deemingly to have been passed u/s 255 of the code and on that finding no revision was competent before the Additional Sessions Judge, Firozpur, thus his order dated 30.08.1980 is illegal and has to be quashed. As sequel there to the charge against the accused/petitioner too, is groundless and illegal. That too has to Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 7 of 10 pages 8 be quashed." 11. In the case M/S T Azeerur Rehman and Co vs M/s Super Supplies Hon'ble Mr Justice S. Ravinder Bhatt of Hon'ble High Court of Delhi has considered the case of Raja Ram (mentioned above) and has held that: "If a Magistrate exercise power under section 255 on the basis of the materials, and the complaints, concluding that the offences cannot be made out, the order results in acquittal. In such events, only an appeal would be maintainable and not a revision." 12. In case R.P.G Transmission Ltd vs Sakura Seimtsu (I) Ltd in Crl. R Petition No. 92ôÙ93 of 2001 decided on March 4, 2005ôÙ the question before Hon'ble High Court of Delhi was that the accused were discharged in summon cases ie case u/s 138 N I Act. Hon'ble Ms Justice Manju Goel, while dealing with the matter, considered the provisions of section 258 Cr.P.C and held that section 258 Cr.P.C gives power to magistrate to stop the proceedings, at any stage, in summon cases, which is instituted otherwise then upon the complaint. Hence Hon'ble High Court was of the opinion that discharge of accused in summon cases initiated on the complaint is not mentioned in section 258 Cr.P.C, therefore it is "the discharge" for which no provisions Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 8 of 10 pages 9 has been provided in the court, therefore it is to be read as an order of acquittal. As per provisions of section 401 (4) Cr.P.C when appeal lies but no appeal is brought, no proceedings by way of revision should be entertained at the instance of party who could have appealed. Therefore, Hon'ble High Court in case R.P.G Transmission Ltd vs Sakura Seimtsu (I) Ltd has observed that against the order of discharge in these circumstances, only appeal should have been preferred. Since no appeal was preferred, revision was not maintainable. 13. In view of judgments passed by Hon'ble High Court in cases M/S T Azeerur Rehman and Co. vs M/s Super Supplies and R.P.G Transmission Ltd vs Sakura Seimtsu (I) Ltd, I am of the opinion that facts of the present case are similar to the facts before Hon'ble High Court in above mentioned cases and therefore, the order of discharge passed by Ld Trial Court in the present case can only be challenged by way of appeal and not by way of revision. Therefore, the present revision as filed by the complainant is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed. 14. In view of my above discussion, the revision petition filed by the revisionist is dismissed being not maintainable. Since the Revision petition as filed is not maintainable, thus merits of petition are not being being considered accordingly. 15. Trial court record be sent back to Ld Trial Court with the Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 9 of 10 pages 10 copy of the order. File of revision be consigned to Record Room. ANNOUNCED IN THE OPEN COURT ON 15th November, 2014. ( SHAIL JAIN ) ADDL. SESSIONS JUDGE (CENTRAL) DELHI Cr. R. NO. 22/14 Page 10 of 10 pages