State vs . Balbir Singh Etc. on 1 September, 2018 IN THE COURT OF MS. CHETNA SINGH: ACMM-02 (CENTRAL), TIS HAZARI COURTS, DELHI STATE Vs. BALBIR SINGH ETC. New Case No: 294808/16 FIR N0. : 131/06 U/S : 420/506/34 IPC r/w Section 120-B IPC PS : Gulabi Bagh Date of Institution : 29.01.2007 Date on which case reserved for Judgment : 01.09.2018 Date of Judgment : 01.09.2018 JUDGMENT 1. FIR No. of the case : 131/2006 2. Date of commission of offence : 16.11.2005 3. Name of the accused :1. Balbir Singh S/o Sh. Hukam Chand, R/o H.No. 540/19, Nai Basti, Kishan Ganj, Delhi. (Since Deceased). 2. Manoj Kumar S/o Sh. Balbir Singh, E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 1 of 18 R/o H.No. 540/19, Nai Basti, Kishan Ganj, Delhi. 4. Offence complained of : 420/506/34 IPC r/w Section 120-B IPC 5. Plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty. 6. Final order : Acquitted. BRIEF FACTS 1. It is allegation of the prosecution that accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) alongwith co-accused Manoj dishonestly represented himself to be the sole and the absolute owner of the House bearing No. 16/10910 constructed on plot No. C-194, situated at Sant Nagar, Karol Bagh, Delhi (hereinafter referred to as property) and on the basis of the said fraudulent representation induced the complainant to enter into an agreement to sell on 16.11.2005 for a sum of Rs.13 lakhs. It is further alleged that both the accused persons induced the complainant to pay a sum of Rs.3 lakhs, however the title of the property was not transferred in the favour of the complainant and thus they cheated the complainant and further threatened the complainant with life and thus committed offences punishable u/s 420 / 506 / 34 IPC read with Section 120-B IPC. E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 2 of 18 2. On the basis of a complaint, present FIR was registered. After carrying out the investigation, charge sheet was filed. Both accused persons were summoned. After compliance of section 207 Cr. P.C, charge under Section u/s 420 / 506 / 34 IPC read with Section 120-B IPC was framed on 24.05.2007 against both accused persons. APPRECIATION OF EVIDENCE 3. In order to prove its case, the prosecution has examined ten witnesses in total. 4. PW-1 ASI Rajinder Singh deposed that on 02.07.2006, he was posted as Duty Officer at PS Gulabi Bagh and received a complaint from SI M.H. Khan to register the present case FIR which is Ex.PW1/A. On the basis of endorsement Ex.PW1/B, bearing his signature at point A. This witness was cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel for both accused persons wherein he stated that he did not have any personal knowledge regarding the present case. 5. PW-2 Sh. Lokesh Kumar / complainant stated that on 02.11.2005, both accused persons namely Balbir and Manoj offered him to sell the house bearing No. 16/10910, Sant Nagar, Karol Bagh by inducing him that they are the sole and absolute owners of the said property. Accused Balbir produced the copy of the agreement to sell between him E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 3 of 18 and the prior owner Sh. Sant Lal which is Mark "A" and assured that the registered Deed of the said property is lying in the bank locker and he would produce the same at the time of the registration of the property. On account of these assurances, the complainant handed over Rs.1 lakh in cash and two cheques of Rs.1 lakh each from the account of his son Rajeev Gupta which are Mark "B". The complainant further deposed that the total sell consideration of the property was Rs.13 lakhs and an agreement to sell was executed by the accused persons in his favour which is Mark "C". The cheque given by the complainant to the accused was encashed by the accused persons and when the last date of the execution of the sell deed elapsed, the complainant contacted the accused persons and requested them to execute the sell deed, however, the accused persons kept on delaying the matter on one pretext or the other. The complainant further deposed that the accused persons threatened him with dire consequences and on enquiry about the property, it was revealed that the accused persons were not the owners of the said property. He further deposed that the accused persons fraudulently entered into an agreement to sell qua the property and hence he gave a complaint which is Ex.PW2/A bearing his signature at point "A". Investigating Officer seized the original agreement to sell, earnest money payment receipt etc vide seizure memo Ex.PW2/B and Ex.PW2/C, all bearing his signatures at point "A" and "B" respectively. This witness was cross-examined at length by Ld. defence counsel wherein he admitted that accused Manoj was not even an attesting witness in the agreement to sell and he cannot identify the signature of the E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 4 of 18 attesting witness on the said agreement due to lapse of time. 6. PW-3 Sh. Kamlesh Kumar Sinha deposed that he handed over the cheque and statement of account of Mr. Rajeev Gupta which is Ex.PW3/A bearing his signature at point "A" and the same was taken into possession vide seizure memo Ex.PW3/B, bearing his signature at point "A". His reply in pursuance of letter dated 29.07.2006 to the police officer on 31.07.2006 bearing his signature at point "A". This witness was cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel wherein he stated that no official order has been annexed with the letter dated 29.07.2006 given by the police officer. 7. PW-4 HC Naresh Kumar deposed that on 23.11.2006, accused Manoj came to the chowki with surety namely Laxman and Investigating Officer interrogated him and arrested him vide arrest memo Ex.PW4/A and conducted his personal search vide search memo Ex.PW4/B, both bearing his signatures at point "A". This witness was not cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel despite opportunity being given. 8. PW5 Sh. Sant Lal deposed that he is real owner of the property which was allegedly transferred upon and the said property was owned by his father. He further deposed that accused Balbir had approached him regarding the purchase of the said property and gave him the earnest money of Rs.1 lakh and agreed to pay Rs.2 lakhs within two months but he E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 5 of 18 did not pay the said amount. He identified the accused Balbir present in the court and on his resiling from the original statement, he was cross- examined by Ld. APP for State wherein he admitted that he had told the accused that he could not sell the property to the accused as it was jointly owned by him and his sisters after demise of his father. He further admitted that his sisters had not given the NOC regarding sell of the property. He was cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel at length wherein he admitted that had entered into an agreement with accused Balbir that accused Balbir would pay the remaining amount within six months from the date of the execution of the agreement and on receipt of the same he would execute the document of the property in the favour of accused Balbir Singh. 9. PW-6 Ct. Surender Kumar deposed that he was posted at PP Andha Mughal, PS Gulabi Bagh and IO/SI Rajesh Kumar arrested accused Balbir Singh (accused present in the court correctly identified by the witness) vide arrest memo Ex.PW6/A and conducted his personal search vide search memo Ex.PW6/B, both bearing his signature at point A. This witness was not cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel despite opportunity being given. 10. PW-7 Mohd. Nadim Qureshi, being one of the attesting witness to the agreement to sell deposed that he works in a slaughter house and on 16.11.2005, complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar had given earnest money of Rs.1 lakh and two cheques of Rs.2 lakhs to accused Balbir and Manoj E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 6 of 18 regarding the property at Sant Nagar and he identified the both accused persons present in the court. He further deposed that the complainant demanded the ownership document of the property from the accused Balbir and Manoj, however accused replied that the said papers have been kept in the locker of his wife, who had gone to her Sasural. On 24.11.2005, the complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar got one cheque cleared. Thereafter, complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar demanded papers of the property from accused persons, however the accused persons continued to delay the same on one pretext or the other. Thereafter, on enquiry, it was revealed that the property was the ancestral property of one Sant Lal and it is only after the NOC from his sisters that he could sell the said property otherwise he would return the earnest money to accused Balbir Singh. Sh. Sant Lal further told the complainant that the accused Balbir had taken his signatures on an agreement to sell after winning his trust. This witness further deposed that after making aforesaid enquiry they returned to the house of the accused Balbir Singh and complainant requested the accused Balbir to return the earnest money. However, accused Manoj started abusing the complainant and hence the present case was registered. He further identified his signatures at point "C" on memo Ex.PW2/B, at point "B" on Ex.PW2/C and at point "A" on the original agreement to sell Ex.PW7/A. E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 7 of 18 This witness was cross-examined at length by Ld. defence counsel, however his cross-examination is not repeated here for the sake of brevity. 11. PW-8 retired SI M.H. Khan deposed that on 02.07.2006, he received complaint Ex.PW2/A, and made endorsement on the complaint Ex.PW8/A and handed over the same to Duty Officer for registration of FIR. Thereafter duty officer handed over the original rukka and copy of FIR to him and he went to the house of the complainant. On enquiry, it was revealed that the complainant had gone to attend some wedding and thereafter the investigation of the present case was marked to Inspector Ram Sunder and he was transferred and file was handed over to MHC(R). This witness was cross-examined at length by Ld. defence counsel, however his cross-examination is not repeated here for the sake of brevity. 12. PW-9 Inspector Ram Sunder (inadvertently mentioned as PW8) deposed that on 27.07.2006, he was posted as Inspector at PS Gulabi Bagh and seized one photocopy slip bearing original signature of Balbir Singh regarding one cheque bearing No. 495232 of Punjab National Bank. He further deposed that the complainant informed him that the said cheque was issued by him to accused Balbir Singh. The complainant further informed him that he gave Rs.1 lakh to accused Balbir Singh and received the above mentioned cheque from the accused Balbir Singh in lieu of which the accused gave him the slip seized vide memo Ex.PW2/C, E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 8 of 18 bearing his signature at point C. He further deposed that complainant also handed over the agreement to sell and other documents regarding porperty in question which were seized vide memo Ex.PW2/B and another cheque No. 495233 which was seized vide memo Ex.PW3/B. He further deposed that he recorded statement of Mohd. Nadim and Lokesh Kumar and thereafter he was transferred and case was handed over to MHC(R). This witness was cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel. However, his cross-examination is not repeated here for the sake of brevity. 13. PW-10 Rajeev Gupta (inadvertently mentioned as PW9) deposed that he does not remember the exact date but in the year 2005, accused Balbir Singh and Manoj both came at his shop at Bahadurgarh Road and offered to sell him one plot at Sant Nagar, Karol Bagh and it was informed to him that the plot belonged to accused Balbir Singh. After about two days, accused persons again came to his shop and he handed over two cheques of Rs.1 lakh each and Rs.1 lakh in cash to his father and his father handed over the cheques and cash to accused Manoj and one of the cheque was encashed by the accused Balbir Singh and the other cheque was returned by accused Manoj on 22.11.2005 to him and he gave Rs.1 lakh to accused persons. He further deposed that in the year 2006, he alongwith his friend Nadeem Qureshi went to the house of accused persons and requested accused Balbir in presence of accused Manoj to get the plot registered or to return their money. However, the accused persons manhandled them and also abused them. Thereafter, a complaint was E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 9 of 18 lodged with the police and he identified accused Manoj correctly in the court. He further identified his signatures on cheque Ex.PW8/A at point "A". This witness was cross-examined by Ld. APP for State wherein he stated that accused Manoj and Balbir showed him and his father the plot to be sold and he alongwith his father went to Gulabi Bagh and lodged DD No.16A. This witness was cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel, however, his cross-examination is not repeated here for the sake of brevity. 14. PW-11 Inspector Rajesh Kumar (inadvertently mentioned as PW10) deposed that he was posted as I/C PP Andha Mughal and the present case was marked to him for further investigation. He searched for the accused persons and as accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) was released on anticipatory bail, he was arrested vide memo Ex.PW6/A, bearing his signature at point B and thereafter released on bail. He further deposed that he recorded the statement of Sant Lal (the original owner of the property) and on 23.11.2006, he arrested accused Manoj vide arrest memo Ex.PW4/A, bearing his signature at point A who was also released on bail. On 03.01.2007, he took specimen signatures of accused persons and sent the signatures to FSL for expert opinion and recorded statement of witnesses. After obtaining the result FSL result, he filed supplementary chargesheet before Hon'ble Court. This witness was cross-examined by Ld. defence counsel, however, his cross-examination is not repeated here for the sake of brevity. E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 10 of 18 15. Upon completion of Prosecution Evidence, statement of accused Manoj u/s 313 Cr. P.C was recorded on 12.01.2018 wherein the accused has pleaded innocence and he had opted to lead defence evidence. DW1 Sh. Deep Chand and DW2 Sh. Hari Singh examined. Both the DWs stated that accused Manoj Kumar is a gentle boy and they heard no loud voice as regards any threat being given to the complainant by accused Manoj as they live in a nearby house. These witnesses were cross-examined by Ld. APP for State, however the same is not repeated here as the same forms part of the record. Thereafter, defence evidence was closed. 16. I have heard the rival submissions and carefully perused the record. REASONS FOR DECISION 17. In order to prove its case, the prosecution has examined eleven witnesses in total including the complainant. 18. It is pertinent to mention that at the outset proceedings qua accused Balbir Sing stood abated vide order dated 21.08.2015, hence the evidence on record is required to be appreciated qua accused Manoj. It is to be seen whether accused Manoj conspired together with accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) to deceive the complainant and also threatened the complainant with dire consequences. E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 11 of 18 19. Before appreciating the testimony of the above mentioned witnesses, it is necessary to list out the essential ingredient of Sections 420 / 506 / 34 / 120-B IPC, which are as follows: Essential ingredients of Section 420 IPC are as follows: (1) Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security; (2) Or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security. Essential ingredients of Section 506 IPC are as follows: (1) Whoever commits, the offence of criminal intimidation and; (2) If the threat be to cause death or grievous hurt, (3) Or to cause the destruction of any property by fire, or to cause an offence punishable with death. Essential ingredients of Section 34 IPC are as follows: (1) That there must be a criminal act; (2) The act must have been done by several persons in E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 12 of 18 furtherance of their common intention. 20. Now I move on to analyse the material available on record for commission of offence of criminal conspiracy punishable under Section 120B IPC. 21. The offence of criminal conspiracy is statutorily defined under Section 120A IPC. Section 120A IPC is reproduced herein for ready reference:- Section 120A Definition of Criminal Conspiracy- "When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done- (1) an illegal act, or (2) An act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy; Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof. " 22. The necessary ingredients required to bring home charge for commission of offence of criminal conspiracy is enlisted herein as under:- (A) That there should be an agreement between the persons who are alleged to conspire: (B) That the agreement should be: (i) for doing of an illegal E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 13 of 18 act, or (ii) for doing by illegal means an act which may not itself be illegal. 23. The material witnesses examined by the prosecution are PW2/complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar and PW5 Sh. Sant Lal (real owner of the property i.e. C-49, H.No. 10910, Sant Nagar, Karol Bagh, Delhi), PW7 Mohd. Nadim Qureshi (attesting witness of the agreement to sell). PW10 Sh. Rajeev Gupta (inadvertently mentioned as PW9) (son of the complainant). 24. Apart from the these material witnesses, the prosecution examined formal witnesses who are also police officials for registration of FIR, first Investigating Officer and Second Investigating Officer etc. 25. A perusal of the testimony of all the material witnesses clearly reveals that the alleged dishonest transaction took place between accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) and the complainant Lokesh Kumar. It is alleged that the accused Manoj was accompanying the accused Balbir (since deceased) during the entire transaction in relation to the property bearing No. 16/10910, Sant Nagar, Karol constructed on plot No. C-194, situated at Sant Nagar, Karol Bagh, Delhi. 26. It is pertinent to note that the testimony of all the material witnesses clearly states that the accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) was the person with whom all the documents i.e. agreement to sell were E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 14 of 18 executed. Accused Manoj is not even an attesting witness to the transaction. 27. On the other hand, the testimony of PW5 Sh. Sant Lal reveals that another agreement was entered into by the accused Balbir with PW5 Sh. Sant Lal who was the real owner of the property which could not materialize in respect of the same property. PW5 Sh. Sant Lal knew that he could not transact the property without the NOC from his two sisters. Despite knowing the said facts, he entered into an agreement with accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) who was not owner due to the reasons best known to him and accused Balbir Singh (since deceased). In this regard PW5 was cross-examined in detail by Ld. defence counsel wherein he admitted that accused Balbir Singh had filed a suit for specific performance for compliance of the agreement executed between him and accused Balbir Singh. 28. A perusal of the testimony of PW5 and his cross-examination clearly reveals that accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) entered into the transaction of the property after assurance from PW5 that the said property will be transferred to the name of accused Balbir Singh by PW5 Sh. Sant Lal. It is also clearly revealed that the same did not take place and the accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) had filed the suit for specific performance against PW5 Sh. Sant Lal. Thus, even if it is presumed that accused Balbir (deceased) entered into another agreement to sell qua the same property with complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar, it cannot be presumed E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 15 of 18 that the same was done in order to deceive or dupe the complainant. Given the fact that the propety was not transferred by PW5 Sant Lal in the name of accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) he could not have further got it registered in the name of complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar. Even otherwise, a perusal of the testimony of PW5 clearly reveals that the transaction with complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar was not entered into by accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) with an intention of deceiving him. Intention to deceive has not been proved. 29. As far as, the role of accused Manoj in the entire transaction is concerned, it is a matter of record that name of accused Manoj does not find mention anywhere in any of the document relied upon by the prosecution. It has only been mentioned by the witness that accused Manoj was present at that time of transaction/execution of document between accused Balbir and complainant Sh. Lokesh Kumar. However, mere presence of the son i.e. accused Manoj with his father accused Balbir Singh (since deceased), cannot impute a dishonest intention upon accused Manoj. It is likely that accused Manoj was merely accompanying his father who had entered into the entire transaction with the complainant on the assurance of PW5 i.e. the original owner of the property. 30. For the purpose of proving criminality and conspiracy, the prosecution had to show corroborative circumstances which would have helped the court in deciding that accused Manoj was in conspiracy with accused Balbir Singh (since deceased) to deceive the complainant. This E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 16 of 18 cannot be decided from the perusal of the testimony of all the material witnesses. Though there is a verbal evidence on record stating that accused Manoj was present at the time of execution of document and at the time of handing over all the cheque of Rs.1 lakh and cash of Rs.1 lakh. However, mere presence during the entire transaction does not automatically prove the common intention of cheating between both the accused. There is nothing on record to suggest that accused Manoj acted in furtherance of common intention with accused Balbir Singh to deceive the complainant. There is no covert and overt act that can be imputed to accused Manoj leading to his complicity in cheating the complainant. Thus in absence of cogent proof of cheating beyond a reasonable doubt, benefit of doubt is required to be granted to accused Manoj. Hence offence u/s 420 / 34 / 120-B IPC remains not proved against accused Manoj. 31. In so far allegations u/s 506 IPC are concerned, there are mere vague and unspecific allegations that both accused persons abused and manhandled the complainant, No date, time or place has been mentioned. It is not explained as to why call at 100 number was not made when the accused persons threatened the complainant with dire consequences and thus mere vague allegations cannot be said to be sufficient to prove the guilt of accused u/s 506 IPC. 32. It has been held in case of Sadhu Singh V/s State of Punjab 1997(3) Crime 55 the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court :- E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 17 of 18 "In a criminal trial, it is for the prosecution to establish its case beyond all reasonable doubts. It is for the prosecution to travel the entire distance from may have to must have. If the prosecution appears to be improbable or lacks credibility the benefit of doubt necessarily has to go to the accused." 33. As a cumulative effect of the abovesaid discussion, I am of the opinion that a reasonable shadow of doubt is cast upon the prosecution version. Accused Manoj is acquitted of the charge framed for the offences punishable u/s 420 / 506 / 34 / 120-B IPC levelled against him. 34. Ordered accordingly. Digitally signed CHETNA by CHETNA SINGH SINGH Date: 2018.09.06 Announced in the open court 15:53:35 +0000 on 01.09.2018 (Chetna Singh) Addl. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate-02 Central/THC/Delhi/01.09.2018 E FIR No . 131/06 State Vs. Balbir Singh etc. PS Gulabi Bagh Page No. 18 of 18