Complainant vs . on 27 October, 2022 IN THE COURT OF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-07, WEST, TIS HAZARI COURTS, NEW DELHI Presided over by- Devanshu Sajlan, DJS Ct. Case No. -: 2000/2016 Unique Case ID -: DLWT020011222010 No. Police Station -: Paschim Vihar (East) Section(s) -: 500 IPC In the matter of - ASHOK DRALL .... Complainant VS. KANTA CHOUDHARY .... Accused 1. Name of Complainant : Sh. Ashok Drall 2. Name of Accused : Ms. Kanta Choudhary Offence complained of or 3. : 500 IPC proved 4. Plea of Accused : Not Guilty 5. Date of Filing of case : 15.01.2008 6. Date of Reserving Order : 11.10.2022 7. Date of Pronouncement : 27.10.2022 8. Final Order : Convicted Argued by -: Complainant in person. Sh. P. K. Sharma, Ld. Counsel for the accused. Digitally signed DEVANSH by DEVANSHU SAJLAN U SAJLAN Date: 2022.10.27 15:14:06 +05'30' Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 1 of 28 BRIEF STATEMENT OF REASONS FOR THE DECISION-: A. FACTUAL MATRIX: Reputation, reputation, reputation! Oh, I have lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. - William Shakespeare 1. The aforesaid lines, from William Shakespeare's famous play "Othello", spoken by Cassio in a state of deep anguish, would resonate with any person whose reputation has been lowered in the eyes of the society. 2. The complainant in the present case, who is an advocate by profession, claims to be similarly anguished due to the harm caused to his reputation by the actions of the accused. Briefly stated, the case of the complainant is that the accused filed a complaint against the complainant before Bar Council of Delhi on 23.03.2007 (bearing no. 17/2007) levelling serious and defamatory allegations against him. The allegation which the complainant has alleged to be deeply defamatory is reproduced hereinbelow: Ashok Drall ne kaha ki mere to judges se bhi achhe sambandh hai main to murder case bhi lakh do lakh me nipatwa deta hu yeh to mamuli si bat hai. Mai Ashok Drall vai Neelam ki bataon mai aa gayi. 3. The complainant has submitted that the said complaint, made to the Bar Council of Delhi by the accused, is duly signed and sworn by her. It has been submitted that the accused, by way of the aforesaid allegation, has clearly imputed that the complainant acts as a broker between judges and litigants for the purpose of facilitating bribery. It has been further submitted that the accused has imputed Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 2 of 28 that the institution of justice is just a toy which can be sold and purchased by people. 4. The complainant has further submitted that he has a good reputation in legal fraternity and except for the present libel made by the accused against him, there is no complaint or allegation against the complainant in relation to his professional conduct. It has been further submitted that the complaint of the accused was dismissed by the Bar Council of Delhi on 30.05.2008 on the ground that no prima-facie case of misconduct was found against the complainant. Based on the same, it has been contended that the allegation of the accused was made without any due care and caution in order to harm the reputation of the complainant. It has been further submitted that the defamatory allegation made by the accused was made with an intention to lower the complainant's reputation in the estimation of his fellowmen and judicial set-up, and that due to the defamatory allegations of the accused, the honesty and integrity of the complainant in the society and profession has been impeached. B. PRE-SUMMONING EVIDENCE & NOTICE 5. Pre-summoning evidence was led by the complainant and on finding a prima-facie case, the accused was summoned to face trial vide order dated 19.09.2011. Thereafter, the accused was served with the notice of accusation under Section 251 , Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter " CrPC ") on 19.07.2013, to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 3 of 28 C. COMPLAINANT EVIDENCE: 6. During the trial, complainant led the following oral and documentary evidence against the accused to prove his case beyond reasonable doubt-: ORAL EVIDENCE Sh. Virender Sirohi (Supervisor, BCD CW-1 : Office) Sh. Hansraj (Ahlmad from the Court of CW-2 : Ld. Civil Judge-20, Central, THC, Delhi) CW-3 : Sh. Ashok Drall (complainant) DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE Ex. CW1/A Complaint dated 23.03.2007 filed by the : (OSR) accused before Bar Council of Delhi Ex. CW1/B : Copy of affidavit (OSR) Ex. CW1/C : Copy of notice issued by BCD (OSR) Copy of order dated 30.05.2008 vide Ex. CW1/D : which complaint of the accused was (OSR) dismissed by BCD Copy of plaint in the civil suit titled as Ex. CW2/A : Ashok Drall vs. Kanta Chaudhary Copy of written statement in the civil suit Ex. CW2/B : titled as Ashok Drall vs. Kanta Chaudhary D. STATEMENT OF ACCUSED: 7. Thereafter, before the start of defence evidence, in order to allow the accused to personally explain the incriminating circumstances appearing in evidence against her, the statement of accused was recorded without oath under Section 281 read with Section 313 CrPC. In reply, the accused denied all allegations and Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 4 of 28 stated that she wishes to examine herself in her defense. E. DEFENSE EVIDENCE: 8. The accused led the following oral and documentary evidence in her defense evidence-: ORAL EVIDENCE DW-1 : Ms. Kanta Chaudhary (Accused) 9. I have heard both sides at length. I have also given my thoughtful consideration to the material appearing on record. Learned counsel for the accused has raised the following contentions in the defense of the accused: (i) A complaint made to a lawful authority (Bar Council in this case) does not amount to publication of statement/ imputation; (ii) The accused's complaint does not include any defamatory imputation since it is based on truth; (iii) The present case is covered within the scope of eighth exception to section 499; (iv) The undersigned court does not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present complaint; (v) The civil property dispute between the complainant and the accused has already been decreed in favour of the accused by the civil court, and the judgment of the civil court is binding on this court. 10. The aforesaid contentions and ingredients of the offense are discussed next. Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 5 of 28 F. INGREDIENTS OF THE OFFENCE: 11. The offence of defamation is defined under section 499 of the IPC, which provides as follows: Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1.-It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.-It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3.-An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.-No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 12. Punishment for the offence of defamation is provided under Section 500 IPC as follows: 500. Punishment for defamation.-Whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both. 13. The sine-qua-non of the offence of defamation lies in one word - "Reputation". The term reputation was defined in the case titled as Kiran Bedi v. Committee of Inquiry, (1989) 1 SCC 494, by the Hon'ble Apex Court of India in the following manner: It is stated in the definition Person, 70 C.J.S.p. 688 note 66 that legally the term "person" includes not only the physical body and members, but also every bodily sense and personal attribute, Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 6 of 28 among which is the reputation a man has acquired. Blackstone in his Commentaries classifies and distinguishes those fights which are annexed to the person, jura personarum, and acquired fights in external objects, jura rerum; and in the former he includes personal security, which consists in a person's legal and uninterrupted enjoyment of his life, his limbs, his body, his health, and his reputation. And he makes the corresponding classification of remedies. The idea expressed is that a man's reputation is a part of himself, as his body and limbs are, and reputation is a sort of fight to enjoy the goods opinion of others, and it is capable of growth and real existence, as an arm or leg. Reputation is, therefore, a personal fight, and the right to reputation is put among those absolute personal fights equal in dignity and importance to security from violence. According to Chancellor Kent, "as a part of the rights of personal security, the preservation of every person's good name from the vile arts of detraction is justly included. The laws of the ancients, no less than those of modern nations, made private reputation one of the objects of their protection. 14. Further, in the case titled as Vishwanath Agrawal v. Sarla Vishwanath Agrawal, (2012) 7 SCC 288, it was observed that: Reputation is not only the salt of life, but also the purest treasure and the most precious perfume of life. It is extremely delicate and a cherished value this side of the grave. It is a revenue generator for the present as well as for the posterity. 15. The significance of reputation has also been emphasized by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Subramanian Swamy v. Union of India, (2016) 7 SCC 221, in the following words: 34. The reference to international covenants has a definitive purpose. They reflect the purpose and concern and recognise reputation as an inseparable right of an individual. They juxtapose the right to freedom of speech and expression and the right of reputation thereby accepting restrictions, albeit as per law and necessity. That apart, they explicate that the individual honour and reputation is of great value to human existence being attached to dignity and all constitute an inalienable part of a complete human being. To put it differently, sans these values, no person or individual can conceive the idea of a real person, for absence of these aspects in life makes a person a non-person and an Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 7 of 28 individual to be an entity only in existence perceived without individuality. 195. . . . Right to free speech cannot mean that a citizen can defame the other. Protection of reputation is a fundamental right. It is also a human right. Cumulatively it serves the social interest. Thus, we are unable to accept that provisions relating to criminal defamation are not saved by doctrine of proportionality because it determines a limit which is not impermissible within the criterion of reasonable restriction. It has been held in D.C. Saxena v. Chief Justice of India [D.C. Saxena v. Chief Justice of India, (1996) 5 SCC 216], though in a different context, that if maintenance of democracy is the foundation for free speech, society equally is entitled to regulate freedom of speech or expression by democratic action. The reason is obvious viz. that society accepts free speech and expression and also puts limits on the right of the majority. Interest of the people involved in the acts of expression should be looked at not only from the perspective of the speaker but also the place at which he speaks, the scenario, the audience, the reaction of the publication, the purpose of the speech and the place and the forum in which the citizen exercises his freedom of speech and expression. The Court had further observed that the State has legitimate interest, therefore, to regulate the freedom of speech and expression which liberty represents the limits of the duty of restraint on speech or expression not to utter defamatory or libellous speech or expression. There is a correlative duty not to interfere with the liberty of others. Each is entitled to dignity of person and of reputation. Nobody has a right to denigrate others' right to person or reputation. (Emphasis Added) 16. Therefore, as observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, protection of reputation has been held to be a fundamental right, and that the same is universally recognized to be an integral and important aspect of dignity of every individual. The right to preservation of one's reputation is acknowledged as a right in rem, a right good against all the world (see Shobhana Bhartia & Ors v. NCT of Delhi, reported in AD (CR) (2007) 5 229). 17. Moving on, the ingredients of the offense of defamation were discussed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Subramanian Swamy (supra): Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 8 of 28 168. For the aforesaid purpose, it is imperative to analyse in detail what constitutes the offence of "defamation" as provided under Section 499 IPC. To constitute the offence, there has to be imputation and it must have been made in the manner as provided in the provision with the intention of causing harm or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the person about whom it is made. Causing harm to the reputation of a person is the basis on which the offence is founded and mens rea is a condition precedent to constitute the said offence. The complainant has to show that the accused had intended or known or had reason to believe that the imputation made by him would harm the reputation of the complainant. The criminal offence emphasises on the intention or harm. Section 44 IPC defines "injury". It denotes any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in body, mind, reputation or property. Thus, the word "injury" encapsulates harm caused to the reputation of any person. It also takes into account the harm caused to a person's body and mind. Section 499 provides for harm caused to the reputation of a person, that is, the complainant. 18. Further, in Google India (P) Ltd. v. Visaka Industries, (2020) 4 SCC 162, it was held that: 105. Under the said provision, the lawgiver has made the making or publishing of any imputation with a requisite intention or knowledge or reason to believe, as provided therein, that the imputation will harm the reputation of any person, the essential ingredients of the offence of defamation. What is the meaning to be attached to the words "making of an imputation" and "publishing of an imputation"? This question has been set out with clarity in a recent judgment which is reported in Mohd. Abdulla Khan v. Prakash K. [Mohd. Abdulla Khan v. Prakash K., (2018) 1 SCC 615 : (2018) 1 SCC (Cri) 255] It was held as follows : (SCC p. 620, para 10) "10. An analysis of the above reveals that to constitute an offence of defamation it requires a person to make some imputation concerning any other person; (i) Such imputation must be made either (a) With intention, or (b) Knowledge, or (c) Having a reason to believe that such an imputation will harm the reputation of the Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 9 of 28 person against whom the imputation is made. (ii) Imputation could be, by (a) Words, either spoken or written, or (b) By making signs, or (c) Visible representations (iii) Imputation could be either made or published. The difference between making of an imputation and publishing the same is: If 'X' tells 'Y' that 'Y' is a criminal -- 'X' makes an imputation. If 'X' tells 'Z' that 'Y' is a criminal -- 'X' publishes the imputation. The essence of publication in the context of Section 499 is the communication of defamatory imputation to persons other than the persons against whom the imputation is made. [Khima Nand v. Emperor, 1936 SCC OnLine All 307 : 1937 Cri LJ 806; Amar Singh v. K.S. Badalia, 1964 SCC OnLine Pat 186 : (1965) 2 Cri LJ 693] " 107. In the light of this discussion, we may only reiterate that the criminal offence of defamation under Section 499 IPC is committed when a person makes a defamatory imputation which, as explained in Mohd. Abdulla Khan [Mohd. Abdulla Khan v. Prakash K., (2018) 1 SCC 615 : (2018) 1 SCC (Cri) 255], would consist of the imputation being conveyed to the person about whom the imputation is made. A publication, on the other hand, is made when the imputation is communicated to persons other than the persons about whom the defamatory imputation is conveyed. A person, who makes the defamatory imputation, could also publish the imputation and thus could be the maker and the publisher of a defamatory imputation. On the other hand, a person may be liable though he may not have made the statement but he publishes it. 19. In light of the aforesaid decisions, the following two-fold ingredients of the offence of defamation can be culled out: (i) An imputation must be made or published by the accused concerning the complainant. (ii) Intention to cause harm to the reputation of the Complainant: Such imputation must be made/ published either (a) Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 10 of 28 with intention, or (b) with knowledge, or (c) having a reason to believe, that such an imputation will harm the reputation of the person against whom the imputation is made. It is further pertinent to note that the parameter to judge as to whether a particular statement or imputation has harmed the reputation of a person or not, as encoded in Explanation - 4 to Section 499 IPC, is whether the imputation, directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the character or credit of that person or causes it to be believed that the person is in a loathsome or disgraceful state. I. PUBLICATION - Complaint made to lawful authority amounts to publication 20. The first question that needs determination is whether an imputation made by the accused has been published. The allegation of the complainant is that the accused has made defamatory imputations in her complaint filed with the Bar Council of Delhi. 21. The accused has not denied making the complaint to the Bar Council of Delhi. In her examination-in-chief during defense evidence, the accused has specifically deposed that she filed the said complaint with the Bar Council of Delhi. Further, in her cross- examination, the accused has admitted that she had drafted the said complaint herself and that the said complaint was accompanied with an affidavit sworn by her. The copy of the said complaint has been exhibited in evidence as Ex. CW1/A (OSR) and the copy of the affidavit is Ex. CW1/B (OSR). Accordingly, filing of the complaint with Bar Council of Delhi is not in dispute. Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 11 of 28 22. It has been contended by the complainant that a complaint filed before the Bar Council of Delhi amounts to publication whereas learned counsel for the accused has contended otherwise. I humbly agree with the contention of the complainant. The scope of 'publication' in criminal law is broader than civil law (see Sanjay Mishra v. NCT of Delhi, 2012 SCCOnLine Del 1779). Further, it is a settled position of law that a publication to an institution which has authority over the person against whom the imputations are made would amount to publication. In this regard, reliance can be placed upon the decision in Madhuri Mukund Chitnis v. Mukund Martand Chitnis, 1990 SCC OnLine Bom 410, in which the Hon'ble High Court of Bombay has held that: 13...In the present case the imputations are made in a proceeding which is filed in Court and therefore publication is definitely clear. Even a publication to an authority over the person against whom the imputations are made must be held to be sufficient publication which falls within the purview of the said Section 499 of the Penal Code, 1860. 23. Similarly, it has been held by the Hon'ble Kerala High Court in Prabhakaran v. Gangadharan, 2006 SCC OnLine Ker 302 that once a statement has been filed in a court of law, that statement can be taken as published: 7. Admittedly, the complainant was not a party to the proceedings in O.S. No. 481 of 2000. It is alleged in the written statement that the father of the first petitioner trusting the plaintiff-his sister and her husband, the complainant who was a practicing lawyer, affixed his signature wherever he was asked to sign which was misused by the complainant for creating materials to appropriate the plaint schedule properties. It can be seen that the complainant never conducted any case as alleged in the written statement filed in O.S. No. 481 of 2000. Annexue C complaint would show that the imputation now made against the complainant is susceptible to harm his reputation. The stand now taken by the petitioners is that the statements contained in the Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 12 of 28 written statement can be justified by taking a defence as contemplated under the exceptions to S. 499 I.P.C. Once a statement has been filed in a court of law, that statement can be taken as published and if such a statement amounts to per se defamatory, it is the duty of the accused to establish that they are justified in making such a statement under any of the exceptions to S. 499 I.P.C... 24. Lastly, the Hon'ble Madras High Court, in Thangavelu Chettiar v. Ponnammal, 1965 SCC OnLine Mad 248, has also held that: 4. ... But in this case, the defamatory matter contained in the plaint was admittedly signed and filed by the petitioner. There can be no doubt that there was publication of the defamatory matter. 25. Therefore, it is evident that publication includes pleadings, complaints, and affidavits made before a lawful authority. Therefore, the first ingredient (i.e., making/ publication of an imputation) of the offense of defamation stands proved in the present case. II. INTENTION/ KNOWLEDGE TO CAUSE HARM TO REPUTATION 26. Once publication of an imputation has been proved, the next ingredient which requires satisfaction is that defamatory imputation was made by the accused intending to harm or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the complainant. The said ingredient is required to be read together with Explanation 4 to Section 499 IPC, which requires that the imputation, directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 13 of 28 the character or credit of that person or causes it to be believed that the person is in a loathsome or disgraceful state. Therefore, the onus on the complainant is to prove that (i) the accused had an intention/ knowledge/ reason to believe to cause harm to the reputation of the complainant; and (ii) the imputation made by the accused actually caused harm to the reputation of the complainant. II.1 In case of a per se defamatory statement, burden to prove harm to reputation stands discharged. 27. It is pertinent to note that the standard of proof is different in the case of a per se defamatory imputation as opposed to any other imputation. The said distinction has been succinctly explained by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of John Thomas v. K. Jagadeesan (Dr), (2001) 6 SCC 30: 10. Shri Sivasubramaniam, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant contended that the imputations contained in the publication complained of are not per se defamatory. After reading the imputations we have no doubt that they are prima facie libellous. The only effect of an imputation being per se defamatory is that it would relieve the complainant of the burden to establish that the publication of such imputations has lowered him in the estimation of the right-thinking members of the public. However, even if the imputation is not per se defamatory, that by itself would not go to the advantage of the publisher, for, the complaining person can establish on evidence that the publication has in fact amounted to defamation even in spite of the apparent deficiency. So the appellant cannot contend, at this stage, that he is entitled to discharge on the ground that the imputations in the extracted publication were not per se defamatory. 28. Therefore, once a statement is held to be per se defamatory, the complainant is not required to prove loss to his reputation Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 14 of 28 separately and he/ she stands discharged of the said burden. This position of law was first laid down by the Hon'ble Allahabad High Court way back in 1887 in the case of Queen Empress v. McCarthy (ILR 9 All 420): The explanation does not apply where the words used and forming the basis of a charge are per se defamatory. When an expression used verbally or in writing, is doubtful as to its significance and some evidence is necessary to decide what the effect of that expression will be and whether it is calculated to harm a particular person's reputation, it is possible that the principle enunciated in Explanation IV of Sec. 499 might, and would with propriety, be applied. But in this case there is no question as to the significance or meaning of the words written. They are distinctly defamatory within the meaning of Sec. 499 and as such whether they were written in haste or in anger, the respondent is clearly responsible and unless she can show that her case falls within any of the exceptions to the section it was and is impossible for her to resist a verdict of guilty. 29. The aforesaid position of law has also been re-iterated by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court in the case of Sopullo Datta Naik Dessai v. Yeshwant Govind Dessai, 2009 SCC OnLine Bom 1400, wherein the imputation made by the accused referred to the complainant as a person who does things under influence of liquor and as a person who was locked up because of "goondagiri" during a drama festival. These imputations were held to be per se or distinctly defamatory and the complainant was discharged of the burden to prove loss/ harm to reputation. Similarly, even the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court has agreed with the position of law that in case of a per se defamatory statement, harm to reputation is not required to be proved (see Rohini Singh v. State of Gujarat, 2018 SCC OnLine Guj 209). Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 15 of 28 II.2 In case of a per se defamatory statement, burden to prove intention/ knowledge to cause harm stands discharged. 30. In addition to the aforesaid, it is pertinent to note that in case of a per se defamatory statement, necessary mens-rea/ knowledge to cause harm is also required to be presumed. The said position of law has been specifically laid down by the Hon'ble Gujarat High Court in the case of Narottamdas L. Shah v. Patel Maganbhai Revabhai, 1984 SCC OnLine Guj 100: 31. If the imputation is defamatory per se, necessary mens rea will be presumed. No resultant harm may be proved, if the expression itself is defamatory per se. The maker of the statement must know that it will harm the reputation of one concerning whom the same is made. Explanation 1 includes even a dead person. We are not concerned with this explanation. Explanation 2 embraces imputation concerning a company or association or collection of persons as such. The gist of the offence is dissemination of harmful imputation concerning a person. It is not necessary to refer to other explanations for our purposes. 31. Therefore, the twin-fold burden upon the complainant (i.e., to prove that (i) the accused had necessary intention to cause harm or had knowledge or reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the complainant; and (ii) harm to reputation was actually caused due to the imputation made by the accused) stands discharged in case the imputation is held to be defamatory per se. II.3 Parameters of a per se defamatory statement 32. The definition of the phrase "defamatory per se" has been explained in the case of Rohini Singh (supra). In the said case, Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 16 of 28 Hon'ble Justice, J.B. Pardiwala, Single Judge, Hon'ble Gujarat High Court, as he then was, has relied upon the book 'Clerk and Lindsell on Torts (Tenth Edition)' to define the said phrase: 12.2 The meaning of the words "defamatory per se" and their definition, scope and effect have been copiously discussed in Clerk and Lindsell on Torts (Tenth Edition). At page 711 of the said book it is stated that: Language is defamatory on the face of it, either when the defamatory meaning is the only possible meaning, or when it is the only natural and obvious meaning. 33. Therefore, it has to be seen whether the defamatory meaning is the only possible meaning from the imputation made by the accused. At the cost of repetition, the statement of the accused is reproduced hereunder: Ashok Drall ne kaha ki mere to judges se bhi achhe sambandh hai main to murder case bhi lakh do lakh me nipatwa deta hu yeh to mamuli si bat hai. Mai Ashok Drall vai Neelam ki bataon mai aa gayi. 34. The complainant has denied ever making such a claim to the accused. He has contended that the said claim has been imputed to him with an ill-intention to project him as a corrupt and venal person. I am of the considered view that the only possible meaning of the said statement is that the complainant has been projected as a person who claims to be a broker between judges and litigants for the purpose of facilitating bribery. There is no other meaning that can be attributed to the said statement. This imputation undoubtedly is calculated to lower in the estimation of others the ethical character of the complainant as a lawyer. Questioning the honesty of a person is the worst form of accusation and the same can have a serious detrimental effect on the reputation of a person. It would Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 17 of 28 definitely harm the reputation of any person, and especially an advocate, in the estimation of the right-thinking members of the society. There is no doubt that such a statement is per se defamatory. 35. Since the statement of the complainant is per se defamatory, the complainant is discharged of the burden to prove mens rea and harm to reputation. Accordingly, the second ingredient also stands proved in the present case. III. Defence of the accused - Whether the present case is covered within the scope of Exception 8 to section 499 IPC? 36. Since both the ingredients of the offense of defamation have been proved, the only means by which the accused can escape conviction is by proving that her case is covered within any of the exceptions to section 499 IPC. Learned counsel for the accused has taken the defence that the present case is covered within the scope of Exception 8 to section 499 IPC. The said exception is reproduced hereunder: 31. Eighth Exception.--Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person.--It is not defamation to prefer in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that person with respect to the subject- matter of accusation. Illustration If A in good faith accuses Z before a Magistrate; if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a servant, to Z's master;if A in good faith complains of the conduct of Z, a child, to Z's father-A is within this exception. 37. It has been contended that the Bar Council of Delhi has lawful authority over the complainant and since a complaint was filed to the said lawful authority by the accused, the accused enjoys Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 18 of 28 complete immunity in the present case in terms of the eighth exception since a statement made to a person, who has lawful authority over the person against whom defamatory statement has been made, enjoys absolute privilege. 38. The parameters of the eighth exception were explained by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Subramanian Swamy v. Union of India, (2016) 7 SCC 221: 188. Again in M.C. Verghese v. T.J. Poonan [M.C. Verghese v. T.J. Poonan, (1969) 1 SCC 37], it has been ruled that a person making libellous statements in his complaint filed in court is not absolutely protected in a criminal proceeding for defamation, for under the Eighth Exception and the illustration to Section 499 the statements are privileged only when they are made in good faith. . . 189. In Chaman Lal [Chaman Lal v. State of Punjab, (1970) 1 SCC 590 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 253] the Court has opined that good faith requires care and caution and prudence in the background of context and circumstances. The position of the persons making the imputation will regulate the standard of care and caution. . . In M.A. Rumugam v. Kittu [M.A. Rumugam v. Kittu, (2009) 1 SCC 101 : (2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 35 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 245], it has been held that for the purpose of bringing the case within the purview of the Eighth and the Ninth Exceptions appended to Section 499 of the Penal Code, it would be necessary for the accused to prove good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it or of any other person or for the public good. 39. Further, in the case of Chaman Lal v. State of Punjab, (1970) 1 SCC 590, it was held that: Good faith requires care and caution and prudence in the background of context and circumstances. The position of the persons making the imputation will regulate the standard of care and caution. Under the Eighth Exception statement is made by a person to another who has authority to deal with the subject-matter of the complaint whereas the Ninth Exception deals with the statement for the protection of the interest of the person making it. Interest of the person has to be real and legitimate when communication is made in protection of the interest of the person making it. Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 19 of 28 40. Further, in the case of M.C. Verghese v. T.J. Poonan, (1969) 1 SCC 37, it was observed that: 11. In Tiruvengadda Mudali v. Tripurasundari Ammal [ILR 49 Mad 728] a Full Bench of the Madras High Court observed that the exceptions to Section 499 IPC, must be regarded as exhaustive as to the cases which they purport to cover and recourse can be had to the English common law to add new grounds of exception to those contained in the statute. A person making libellous statements in his complaint filed in Court is not absolutely protected in a criminal proceeding for defamation, for under the Eighth Exception and the illustration to Section 499 the statements are privileged only when they are made in good faith. There is therefore authority for the proposition that in determining the criminality of an act under the Penal Code, 1860 the Courts will not extend the scope of special exceptions by resorting to the rule peculiar to English common law that the husband and wife are regarded as one. 41. Therefore, there is no absolute privilege granted to complaints/ statements made to a lawful authority. It is required to be proved that the said statement was made in good faith. The word "good faith" has been defined in Section 52 of the IPC to mean: 52. 'Good faith'--Nothing is said to be done or believed in 'good faith' which is done or believed without due care and attention. 42. Therefore, the eighth exception shall only apply when it is proved that the complaint made to the lawful authority was made with due care and attention. 43. The onus to prove that the statement was made with due care and attention was on the accused. In this regard, reliance can be placed upon M.A. Rumugam v. Kittu, (2009) 1 SCC 101: 19. For the purpose of bringing his case within the purview of the Eighth and the Ninth Exception appended to Section 499 of the Penal Code, it would be necessary for the appellant to prove Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 20 of 28 good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it or of any other person or for the public good. 20. It is now a well-settled principle of law that those who plead exception must prove it. The burden of proof that his action was bona fide would, thus, be on the appellant alone. 44. Similarly, in Maroti v. Ramkrushna, 2021 SCC OnLine Bom 2184, it has been held that: 10. . . In the case of Chaman Lal v. State of Punjab (supra), specifically in the context of Eighth Exception to section 499 of the IPC, in paragraph-8 it has been specifically held that 'good faith' has also to be established as a fact. In paragraph- 16 of the said judgment, it was held that in the facts of the said case, the Court found that there was utter lack of 'good faith' in the accusation... 12. In the case of Chanan Singh v. Tarak Singh (supra), the Lahore High Court specifically dealt with a question pertaining to Eighth Exception to section 499 of the IPC. It was held that a complaint for defamation would be maintainable in respect of allegations made before a public servant and that the burden of proof would lie on the accused person to show that his case fell within Eighth Exception to section 499 of the IPC. It was specifically held that when an accused claims benefit of Eighth Exception to section 499 of the IPC, it has to be proved as a fact. 45. Therefore, the onus to prove the existence of eighth exception is upon the accused. However, the accused has failed to establish the same, even on the scale of preponderance of probabilities. The accused has failed to give any reasonable explanation behind making the concerned accusation against the complainant. It is pertinent to mention here that in the entire cross-examination of the complainant, not even a single suggestion has been made to the complainant that he had indeed made the concerned claim (that he has links with judges, and he can bribe them to get case disposed of) to the accused. There is no cogent evidence (oral or documentary) to show that the accused made the said imputation based on truth or Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 21 of 28 after exercising due care and attention. In order to prove that the said claim was indeed made by the complainant, the accused could have summoned the wife of the complainant, since the said claim was alleged to have been made in the presence of the wife of the complainant. However, the accused neither summoned the wife of the complainant as a witness nor cross-examined the complainant on this aspect. 46. Further, the complainant has proved on record the decision of the Bar Council of Delhi, by which the complaint of the accused was dismissed by the Bar Council of Delhi. The said decision is exhibited as Ex. CW1/D (OSR). It is pertinent to mention that the accused, till date, has not challenged the said order of the Bar Council of Delhi and the said order has attained finality. Learned counsel for the accused has contended that the said order was exhibited in evidence by a clerk who had no authority to depose on behalf of the Bar Council of Delhi. However, I am afraid that objection to mode of proof of a document cannot be taken at the stage of final arguments and is required to be taken at the stage of exhibition of documents. No objection was raised regarding the mode of proof of the order of the Bar Council of Delhi at the stage of exhibition of the said order. Therefore, the said order has been duly admitted in evidence and its exhibition in evidence cannot be challenged now. 47. Absence of any challenge to the decision of the Bar Council itself indicates absence of any good faith on part of the accused in making the complaint to the Bar Council. The accused has failed to bring any cogent evidence on record which shows that the statement Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 22 of 28 made to the Bar Council was made with due care and caution. Therefore, I am of the humble opinion that the accused has not been able to prove that her case is covered within the eighth exception of section 499 IPC. 48. Learned counsel for the accused has contended that good faith of the accused can be ascertained from the fact that the civil case filed by the accused has been decreed in her favour by two courts of law. However, I do not agree with the said contention. The said civil suit pertains to the property dispute between the parties which has no concern with the present defamation complaint. The accused may or may not have sold a plot to the complaint. This Court is not concerned with the property dispute in any manner and is only concerned with the allegation made to the Bar Council of Delhi by the accused. The accused was required to prove that the said allegation was made in good faith (i.e., with due care and caution). The civil property dispute between the parties has no connection with the defamatory imputation made against the accused. Accordingly, I am of the opinion that the fate of the civil property dispute has no bearing on the facts of the present case. Therefore, in absence of any cogent material that the imputation against the accused was made in good faith, I am of the view that eighth exception cannot be availed in the present case. IV. Defence of the Accused - No Territorial Jurisdiction 49. Last argument of the learned counsel for the accused is that the undersigned court does not have territorial jurisdiction in the Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 23 of 28 present case since the defamatory statement was not published within the jurisdiction of the undersigned court. However, I am of the considered view that this objection cannot be raised at this stage for the reasons discussed hereinafter. 50. Firstly, it is a settled position that the objection regarding question of territorial jurisdiction must be raised at the earliest and at any rate, before adducing evidence/examination of witnesses in the Court. In this regard, it is apposite to refer to the following decision of the Division Bench of the Hon'ble Kerala High Court in K. Ramanujan Nair v. S. Sarojini Amma, 1970 SCC OnLine Ker 79, wherein the objection to territorial jurisdiction after recording of evidence was held to be non-maintainable: 2. . . All the prosecution witnesses were examined; and on 12th September 1969 the Magistrate discharged accused persons 2 to 5 and adjourned the case for defence evidence of the petitioner to 13th February 1970. Thereafter, the petitioner filed a petition questioning the territorial jurisdiction of the Court to try the offence. It was on that petition that the impugned order was passed, the Magistrate holding that the petition was belated and that the Court had jurisdiction to proceed with the trial. The revision petition has been placed before a Division Bench by a learned Judge of this Court since he felt that the question involved was one of importance. 6. In the special circumstances we have already pointed out at the commencement of this judgment, namely, that the petitioner did not take the objection of lack of territorial jurisdiction until the entire prosecution evidence was over and even until four of the five accused persons were discharged, we feel that this case may be taken out of the expression "ordinarily" in S. 177 of the Criminal P.C. The petitioner has not even alleged that he is prejudiced by the trial being continued before the Court at Trivandrum: in fact, the circumstances pointed out at the bar indicate, that the trial of the cage in the Trivandrum Court might probably be more convenient to the petitioner. Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 24 of 28 51. Similarly, in another case titled as Meenakshi v. Udaya kumar, 2007 SCC OnLine Ker 435, it was held that the preponderance of judicial opinion is to the effect that if an objection regarding territorial jurisdiction has not been raised at the earliest opportunity, then it will not be entertained by the court: 3. The learned Magistrate took cognizance of the offence and recorded the sworn statement of the complainant and took the case on file as S.T. No. 143/2006. On receipt of summons, the accused entered appearance. The trial of the case was later on commenced. After the evidence in the case was over, the accused was examined under S. 313 Cr. P.C. and the case was posted for arguments when the first respondent accused, for the first time, raised a contention that the said Magistrate lacks territorial jurisdiction to entertain and try the complaint since the place where the revision petitioner complainant is residing and the place where the cheque was presented and the place where the accused is residing are not within the local limits of the JFCM-II, Haripad. 7. [I]t is pertinent to note that the objection regarding territorial jurisdiction was raised only at the fag end of the trial and that too for the first time when the arguments were heard. Even though there is no provision in Cr. P.C. analogous to one contained in S. 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the preponderance of judicial opinion is to the effect that if an objection regarding territorial jurisdiction has not been raised at the earliest opportunity, then it will not be entertained by the court. The position is almost analogous to what is obtained under S. 21 C.P.C. 8. The court below was not justified in entertaining the objection regarding territorial jurisdiction at the belated stage as aforesaid especially when no prejudice was pleaded or proved. The impugned order dated 5.2.07 is accordingly set aside and JFCM-II, Haripad is directed to proceed with S.T. No. 143/06 and dispose it of in accordance with law. 52. Most recently, the aforesaid position of law has been re- iterated by the Hon'ble Kerala High Court in Nishad Mathew v. State of Kerala, 2022 SCC OnLine Ker 4847: 12. Reading the decisions referred by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, it is crystal clear that, when there is no inherent lack of jurisdiction, lack of territorial jurisdiction Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 25 of 28 or ground of irregularity of procedure an order or a sentence awarded by a competent court could not be set aside unless a prejudice is pleaded and proved, which would mean failure of justice. In the case on hand, the accused conceded the jurisdiction of the N.I. Court, Ernakulam and accordingly, trial was completed and the accused raised question of territorial jurisdiction at the fagant. Since the law is settled that, if the Court has otherwise jurisdiction or the Court does not lack inherent jurisdiction, the Court has the power to dispose of the matter wherein, the evidence already recorded, since the question of jurisdiction was not raised before start of trial. 13. In this view of the matter, C.C. No. 154 of 2016 of the N.I. Court, Ernakulam shall be disposed of by the said Court and the transfer ordered by the said court to JFCM, Kalamassery is not necessary. 14. In view of the matter, the learned Sessions Judge set aside the order of transfer, with direction to the of the N.I. Court, Ernakulam to hear and dispose of the matter within a period of three months. I find no illegality in the order and therefore, the order impugned herein is liable to be confirmed. 15. In view of the facts discussed, there is no merit in this petition. Accordingly, this revision petition is dismissed, directing the Judicial First Class Magistrate Court (NI Act), Ernakulam to deliver judgment, after hearing both sides, within a period of one month from the date of receipt or production of a copy of this order. 53. Based on the aforesaid pronouncements, it is evident that the objection regarding lack of territorial jurisdiction is required to be taken at the earliest stage. Once the trial has concluded after recording of entire evidence, the accused cannot be allowed to raise the objection of lack of territorial jurisdiction for the first time, especially when no prejudice has been shown to have been caused to the accused. 54. In light of the aforesaid discussion, I am of the humble opinion that the accused cannot be allowed to raise this objection at the stage of final arguments when it was not raised during any stage of trial. The trial proceedings have lasted for more than fourteen Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 26 of 28 years. The accused has participated in the trial proceedings for fourteen years without raising any objection to the territorial jurisdiction of the undersigned court. Evidence was recorded in detail during trial. Learned counsel for the accused has not contended that any prejudice/ failure of justice has been caused/ has occasioned on account of the trial having been conducted before the undersigned court. It is not the case of the accused that recording of evidence was hampered in any manner on account of the trial having been conducted before the undersigned court. In absence of any prejudice having been caused to the accused, I am of the considered view that the accused cannot be allowed to raise this objection at this stage. 55. Further, it is pertinent to note that there is a difference between inherent lack of jurisdiction and lack of territorial jurisdiction. Competence of a court to try a case goes to the very root of the jurisdiction, and where it is lacking, it is a case of inherent lack of jurisdiction. On the other hand, an objection as to the territorial jurisdiction of a court is a curable irregularity. It is well settled that the objection as to territorial jurisdiction of a court does not stand on the same footing as an objection to the competence of a court to try a case. Section 462 of Cr.P.C. specifically mentions that: No finding, sentence or order of any Criminal Court shall be set aside merely on the ground that the inquiry, trial or other proceedings in the course of which it was arrived at or passed, took place in a wrong sessions division, district, sub-division or other local area, unless it appears that such error has in fact occasioned a failure of justice. Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 27 of 28 56. Therefore, since the objection regarding lack of territorial jurisdiction was not raised at the first instance or before recording of evidence, it cannot be allowed to be raised at this stage and the said contention stands dismissed on account of belatedness. G. CONCLUSION: 57. To recapitulate the above discussion, the complainant has been successful in establishing his case beyond reasonable doubt. The accused has failed to rebut the case of the complainant by raising a probable defence. The defence of the accused that her case is covered within the scope of eighth exception to section 499 IPC is not proved, even on the standard of preponderance of probabilities. 58. Resultantly, the complaint of the complainant is allowed, and the accused Ms. Kanta Chaudhary is hereby convicted of the offence under Section 500 of the Indian Penal Code, 1872. Let the convict be heard separately on quantum of sentence. 59. A copy of this judgment be given free of cost to the convict. ORDER : - CONVICTED. Pronounced in open court on 27.10.2022 in presence of the accused. This judgement contains 28 pages, and each page has been signed by the undersigned. DEVANSHU Digitally signed by DEVANSHU SAJLAN SAJLAN Date: 2022.10.27 15:13:40 +05'30' (DEVANSHU SAJLAN) Metropolitan Magistrate - 07 West District, Tis Hazari Courts, New Delhi/ 27.10.2022 Ct. Case No. 20000/2016 Ashok Drall v. Kanta Choudhary Page 28 of 28