Maya Devi vs . Ramesh Bidhuri And Ors on 25 May, 2019 IN THE COURT OF SAMAR VISHAL, Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate - I Rouse Avenue Court Complex, New Delhi Ct Cases 1/2019 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS Date of Institution of Case : 15.09.1998 Judgment Reserved for : 22.04.2019 Date of Judgment : 25.05.2019 JUDGEMENT: (a) The date of commission : 13.06.1998 of offence (b) The name of complainant : Maya Devi (c) The name, parentage 1) : Ramesh Bidhuri of accused S/o Ram Rikh Bidhuri R/o 179, Supath House, Village Tughlakabad, New Delhi 2) M.Lal, Correspondent, Sadbhavana Jyoti (Weekly) Newspaper A­032, Transit Camp, Govindpuri, Kalkaji, New Delhi (Proclaimed offender) 3) N.K. Naruka Publisher, Sadbhavana Jyoti (Weekly) Newspaper, A­032, Transit Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 1/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS Camp, Govindpuri, Kalkaji, New Delhi (d) The offence complained of : u/s 500/502 IPC (e) The plea of accused : Pleaded not guilty (f) The final order : Acquitted. (g) The date of such order : 25.05.2019 JUDGMENT 1. The accused Ramesh Bidhuri, M.Lal and N.K. Naruka have been prosecuted for offence under section 500 / 502 of Indian Penal Code. The accused M.Lal could not be traced during the trial and he was declared a proclaimed offender. 2. The case of the complainant is that the accused Ramesh Bidhuri had given an interview in the newspaper Sadbhavana Jyoti to the correspondent M.Lal. Ramesh Bidhuri had used defamatory and derogatory language against the complainant and her daughters. The exact imputations in that interview which according to the complainant harmed her as well as her daughter's reputation are ­ "पशन : ममयम ददवव जज भमजपम कक कमयर करमर हह उसकम कपडम अपनद फमड ददयम और उसकद इजजर कज आसममन मद टमटग ददयम ऐसम आरजप हह आप पर कयम एक Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 2/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS रमजनवदरक कज अपनद हव पमटर कद दकसव औरर कक इजजर कद समथ खखलवमड करनम शजभम ददरम हह उरर : यह बमर सरमसर झझठ हह मदरद उपर ककचड उछमलनद वमलद बहह र सद लजग हह जज मझझद दकसव भव ररह बदनमम करनम चमहरद हह ममयम ददवव चचद ददनन सद भमजपम मद हह उसकम चररत खझद खरमब हह उसकक जवमन जवमन लडदकयमच बस सटदणड पर टहलरव नजर आरव हह उन सभव कम चररत दघनजनम हह कहनद मद भव शमर आ रहव हह और हम इस बमर कज जरर खलखखएगम रब परम चलदगम दक झझठ कयम हजरम हह और सच कयम हजरम हह" 3. Aggrieved by this statement, the complainant filed the present case of defamation on 15.09.1998, against Mr. Ramesh Bidhuri, M.Lal, the correspondent and N.K. Naruka the publisher of the newspaper. All the three accused were summoned vide order dated 15.09.2000. The accused M.Lal could not be found and he was declared a proclaimed offender vide order dated 06.04.2005. 4. On 10.09.2005, a notice under section 251 Cr.PC was framed against the accused Ramesh Bidhuri and N.K. Naruka to which they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. 5. Complainant examined four witnesses. CW­1 is the complainant herself. CW­2 is her daughter Ms. Mitisha, CW­3 is the husband of the complainant Mr. G.D. Renwal and CW­4 is Mr. Vijay Pal. The Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 3/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS complainant, her daughter and her husband had deposed about the impugned interview published in the newspaper Ex.P­1 and how this interview has damaged their reputation. CW­4 Vijay Pal however turned hositle to the complainant. 6. After the evidence of the complainant, the accused were examined under section 313 Cr.PC. As to the incriminating circumstances appearing in evidence against him Mr. Ramesh Bidhuri answered that no such interview was given by him in Sadbhavana Jyoti weekly newspaper as alleged and he does not know any chief correspondent namely, M.Lal nor he received the legal notice as alleged. The complainant is intentionally making false allegations against him as she was desirous of the ticket from the BJP for contesting elections for Municipal Councilor from the area of Kalkaji and he was the District President of Delhi BJP and did not recommend her name. Therefore, in vengeance and for exerting pressure upon him, she in collusion with accused No. 2 M.Lal got published the alleged interview. He had not made any statement anywhere about the complainant or her family member. He further stated that he is innocent and falsely implicated in this case as no such interview was given by him in the newspaper nor he had made any imputations against complainant or her family member with regard to their character. Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 4/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS 7. The accused N.K. Naruka answered that he had not published the newspaper in question. He was not present when the said issue was published in the newspaper and he does not know who had published the said news. The complainant may have published the said news in the newspaper. He is innocent and falsely implicated. 8. No defence evidence was led by the accused and they only relied upon their answers given by them during their examination under section 313 Cr.PC as an explanation of their defence. 9. I heard the learned counsel for the complainant Sh. Ghanshyam Sharma and Sh. Subhash Tanwar and V.P. Kaushik for the accused persons before passing the judgment today. 10. Every person has a right to have his reputation preserved inviolate. This right of reputation is acknowledged as an inherent personal right of every person as part of the right of personal security. A good reputation is an element of personal security, and is protected by the Constitution equally with the right to the enjoyment of life, liberty and property. Right to reputation is a facet of right to life of a person under Article 21 of the Constitution. The right to free speech and expression similarly is also a fundamental right under the Indian Constitution but this right is subject to the reasonable restrictions imposed by law of Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 5/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS defamation. The competing interest which has to be balanced against the interest which a person has in his reputation is the interest which every person has in freedom of speech. The wrong of defamation protects reputation and the defences to the wrong set out in section 499 of The Indian Penal Code in the form of exceptions protects the freedom of speech. The law of defamation like many other branches of the law provides for balancing of interest. 11. Reputation is not only the salt of life, but also the purest treasure and the most precious perfume of life. It is extremely delicate and cherished value this side of the grave. It is a revenue generator for the present as well as for the prosperity. The right to enjoyment of a private reputation, unassailed by malicious assault on it is of ancient origin, and is necessary to human society. A man's reputation is his property, more valuable than other property. No mere poetic fancy suggested the truth that a good name is rather to be chosen than great riches. Indeed, if one reflect on the degree of suffering occasioned by loss of character, and compare it with that occasioned by loss of property, the amount of the former injury far exceeds that of the latter. 12. The essence of the offence of defamation consists in its tendency to cause that description of pain which is felt by a person who knows himself to be the object of the unfavourable sentiments of his fellow­ Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 6/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS creatures, and those inconveniences to which a person who is the object of such unfavourable sentiments is exposed. The concept of defamation is very old and the Penal Code makes no distinction between the written and spoken defamation. According to section 499 of The Indian Penal Code , a person is said to commit the offence of defamation when he, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person except where the publication is protected by the ten statutory exceptions provided in this provision itself. 13. In the present case, the defamatory imputations are alleged to have been published in a newspaper "Sadbhavana Jyoti". It seems to be a weekly newspaper and the edition was from 13 th June to 19th June. The newspaper is exhibited as Ex.P­1 and is on record. No doubt that the imputations made are defamatory of the person to whom they are referred. As per the complainant, the imputations were directed against her and her daughters. The accused have denied this interview. Therefore, in these circumstances, the prosecution/complainant has to prove beyond reasonable doubts that this interview was given by the accused Ramesh Bidhuri and published by the accused N.K. Naruka. It has further to be proved that this interview was published and it lowered Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 7/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS the reputation of the complainant and her daughters in the estimation of others. Therefore, these twin conditions are required to convict the accused for defamation. 14. The newspaper and its publication has to be seen in the light of the denials made by the accused in their examination under section 313 Cr.PC. There are no admitted facts and therefore the entire burden to prove that the accused gave the interview and it was published is upon the complainant. On analyising the evidence of the complainant, it is clear that there is no date on which this interview was given, however, this is not something disastrous to the complainant's case as her case is based on the newspaper Ex.P­1. It is interesting to note that how the complainant came to know about this newspaper. She alleges that it was the witness CW­4 Vijay Pal Sharma, who on 05.08.1998 came to her house and told her that an article was published in Sadbhavana Jyoti weekly newspaper. In the evidence recorded during the enquiry before summoning, this witness Vijay Pal Sharma was examined as CW­3, where he stated that he after reading the newspaper gave the same to the complainant. However, when he deposed during trial as CW­4, he did not say that he gave the newspaper Ex.P­1 to the complainant, in fact he alleged that since the complainant did not get the ticket to contest the elections of Municipal Councilor from BJP she made this false complaint in the Court. He is the only independent Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 8/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS witness in this case and has not supported the case of the complainant. On the contrary, his testimony indicates a false complaint by the complainant. There is no witness to prove the interview in Ex.P­1 as alleged. The only piece of evidence of the existence of the impugned interview is that newspaper Ex.P­1 itself. But the complainant has failed to prove that it is a newspaper and it is published and circulated in the society. No witness has been examined either from the newspaper publishing agency itself or otherwise about the existence of the newspaper. There has to be some cogent evidence to prove that the accused Ramesh Bidhuri actually gave the interview and that the alleged newspaper in which the interview was published was generally in circulation. The proof of these facts were absolutely necessary in the light of the denial of the interview by the accused Ramesh Bidhuri. Mr. N.K. Naruka has been made an accused only on the basis of the fact that he is mentioned as Editor in the newspaper Ex.P­1 itself. However, there is no other independent evidence to prove that he was actually the editor or was connected with the newspaper as an editor or publisher. The newspaper Ex.P­1 contains its address as A­32, T.C. Govindpuri, Kalkaji, New Delhi­19 and the details of other persons associated with it. The complainant should have examined some person associated with this newspaper to prove its existence as well as about giving the impugned interview by Mr. Ramesh Bidhuri. The complainant has examined only herself and her family members which despite the fact Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 9/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS that they are interested witnesses, only proves the defamatory character of the impugned interview but does not prove the actual interview been given by the accused Mr. Ramesh Bidhuri. The interview could have been proved only by some independent witness from the newspaper itself. 15. Further, the publication of the defamatory material is a necessary aspect of the law of defamation. Communicating defamatory matter to some person other than the person of whom it is written is publication in its legal sense. If the statement is sent straight to the person of whom it is written, there is no publication of it, for one cannot publish a defamatory material to himself. That cannot injure his reputation, though it may injure his self­esteem. A man's reputation is the estimate in which others hold him, not the good opinion which he has of himself. The words complained of should be communicated to some person other than the complainant. In this case, the only person in the category of those others in the estimation of which the complainant and her daughters were defamed was CW­4 Vijay Pal Singh. But he did not depose that he read the impugned interview or that the reputation of the complainant and her daughters were lowered in his estimation. This has therefore created a dent in the story of the complainant and the fact that the complainant and her family members came to know about the interview through Vijay Pal Singh has not been proved. It is further not proved Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 10/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS that the reputation of the complainant and her daughters who are the aggrieved in this case was lowered in the estimation of others. To some extent it can be said that the husband of the complainant Mr. G.D. Renwal, who examined himself as CW­3 may be that person in whose estimation the reputation of the complainant was lowered but firstly, being a family member and himself an aggrieved, he is an interested witness and further the only source of his knowledge as per the entire case of complainant and evidence is that he read the interview when the newspaper was given by Vijay Pal Singh. After the denial of this fact by Sh. Vijay Pal Singh, it remains doubtful whether the newspaper ExP­1 was actually given by him and whether it was read by the witness G.D. Renwal. I am conscious of the fact that evidence of an interested witness is not necessarily unreliable but it has also to be borne in mind that the testimony of such a witness should be considered with scrutiny and caution and has to be intrinsically reliable. In the overall facts and circumstance of the case, I do not find that the only evidence of G.D. Renwal is sufficient to prove the publication of the defamatory material. 16. To conclude, the manner in which the impugned interview is addressed is defamatory to a person to whom it is directed and accordingly to the complainant, she and her daughers are those persons. However, the complainant failed to prove beyond reasonable doubts that the accused Mr. Ramesh Bidhuri actually gave this Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 1/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS interview, that Sadbhavana Jyoti is a newspaper in circulation and that the impugned interview if made was actually published so as to lower the reputation of the complainant and her daughters in the estimation of others apart from those who can be turned as aggrieved persons under section 199 Cr.PC, with this interview. 17. Every person accused of a crime is always presumed to be innocent, so that burden lies upon the prosecution to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that all the ingredients of the offence with which the accused is charged are made out. Thus, prosecution has to prove every ingredient in the crime. 18. In the present case, the complainant who is prosecuting the accused for the offence of defamation is unable to prove her case beyond reasonable doubts as discussed above. Accordingly, both the accused Mr. Ramesh Bidhuri and N.K. Naruka are acquitted from the case. 19. The witness Vijay Pal Singh has given contrary testimony in this case according to the complainant. During enquiry, when he was examined as CW­3, he deposed that he read the impugned interview in that newspaper Sadbhavana Jyoti Ex.P­1 and he handed over the same to the complainant. However, when he deposed in the Court on Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 2/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS 25.09.2018, he did not stated these facts. 20. Considering that he was silent during his testimony in the Court during trial, the complainant has filed an application against him for making false statement in the Court under section 340 Cr.PC. The complainant alleges that statement which this witness Vijay Pal Singh gave in the Court on 25.09.18 is false. 21. I have gone through both the statements. The first statement was given by the witness Vijay Pal Singh during enquiry before summoning of the accused on 27.09.99 and the main statement was given on 25.09.18 during trial. It shows that this witness deposed after almost 18 years in the Court from his first statement. When this witness Vijay Pal Singh deposed during the trial, he has been cross examined by the complainant's counsel but the complainant's counsel has not asked any question regarding the facts mentioned in his statement recorded on 27.09.99. This witness was not contradicted or confronted with in cross examination and he merely affirmed that his statement was recorded on 29.09.2000 (in fact his statement was recorded on 27.09.99). He gave an explanation that he was not aware of this statement and it was recorded through the counsel of the complainant and he only signed it. He further deposed that he signed the statement without reading it. Although, this does not seems to be a plausible explanation but Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 3/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS considering this witness was not put the facts which he stated in his earlier statement by complainant's counsel, it can be said that he was merely silent on those facts during his testimony during the trial on 25.09.18. 22. Under section 340 Cr.PC, the Court should act on perjury only in cases where it is expedient in the interest of justice to do so and that an enquiry be made regarding the commission of the offence described under section 195 IPC. 23. Considering the fact that there is difference of almost 18 years in both the statements of this witness, the witness Vijhay Pal Singh was not confronted with the facts made in the earlier statement, pendency of this trial for around 20 years now, I do not find it expedient in the interest of justice to take recourse to the provisions of section 340 Cr.PC against the witness Vijay Pal Singh to start an enquiry against him for alleged commission of offence u/s 195 Cr.PC. The application of complainant under section 340 Cr.PC is accordingly dismissed. Announced in the open court on 25th day of May 2019 SAMAR VISHAL Rouse Avene Court Complex New Delhi Ct Cases 1/2019 Page No. 4/14 MAYA DEVI vs. RAMESH BIDHURI and ORS