Sunita vs State Of Haryana on 2 September, 2013 Author: Inderjit Singh Bench: Inderjit Singh In the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh ...... (1) Criminal Appeal No.S-980-SB of 2001 ..... Date of decision:2.9.2013 Sunita ...Appellant v. State of Haryana ...Respondent .... (2) Criminal Appeal No.S-1096-SB of 2001 ..... Sajjan ...Appellant v. State of Haryana ...Respondent .... (3) Criminal Appeal No.S-1170-SB of 2001 ..... Rajesh ...Appellant v. State of Haryana ...Respondent .... (4) Criminal Appeal No.S-230-SB of 2002 ..... Narender ...Appellant v. State of Haryana ...Respondent .... Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [2] Coram: Hon'ble Mr. Justice Inderjit Singh ..... Present: Mr. Rahul Vats, Advocate for the appellants in Criminal Appeals No.S-980-SB, 1096-SB and 1170-SB of 2001. Mr. Abhimanyu Singh, Advocate for the appellant in Criminal Appeal No.S-230-SB of 2002. Mr. Subhash Godara, Additional Advocate General, Haryana for the respondent-State. ...... Inderjit Singh, J. This judgment will dispose of above four criminal appeals i.e. Criminal Appeal No.S-980-SB of 2001 filed by Sunita; Criminal Appeal No.S-1096-SB of 2001 filed by Sajjan; Criminal Appeal No.S- 1170-SB of 2001 filed by Rajesh and Criminal Appeal No.S-230-SB of 2002 filed by Narender as these arise out of the same judgment and order of sentence dated 9.8.2001/11.8.2001 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Rewari. The above criminal appeals have been filed against the judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 9.8.2001/11.8.2001 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Rewari, whereby all accused-Sunita, Sajjan, Rajesh and Narender have been held guilty and convicted for the offences under Section 392 read with Section 397 and under Section 382 of the Indian Penal Code (hereinafter referred to as ` IPC '). Accused Rajesh has also been held guilty and convicted for the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act. They have been sentenced to Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [3] undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to pay a fine of `5,000/- each and in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year each for the offence under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC. They have also been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years and to pay a fine of `5,000/- each and in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year each for the offence under Section 382 IPC. Appellant-Rajesh has also been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine of `2,000/- and in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months for the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act. All the substantive sentences have been ordered to run concurrently. The brief facts of the prosecution case are that the FIR in the present case has been registered on the statement of Raj Kumar- complainant, who mainly stated that on 5.3.2000 at about 4.00/4.30 a.m. on hearing noise of `thief - thief' raised by Ashok, whose house is situated nearby, as well as the sound created by opening of shutter of his shop, he went to his shop. Ramesh and Mahender Singh were also attracted towards that side by that sound. They all found that the shutter of his shop was open. One woman and two young boys were committing theft inside the shop and one young boy armed with a country made pistol was standing as a guard outside the shop. On seeing people coming towards the shop, the said woman and three boys started running away and on following them, one of the boys had fired from the country made pistol on Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [4] them but they had narrow escape from the fire shot. The woman was overpowered, whereas three young boys succeeded in running away. On inquiry, the woman revealed her name as Sunita and she gave the names of other boys as Narender alias Billu (her husband), Sajjan and Rajesh Harijan resident of Hisar, who had fired a shot from the country made pistol. On checking, five silver coins, two silver Idols of Ganesh and Luxmi weighing about 100 grams, two kgs. small Ilaichi plastic box and currency notes of `5313 were found stolen from the iron box (Galla). It is also reported by the complainant that he could identify those young men, who had committed theft and stolen articles if produced before him. Accused persons Sajjan, Narender and Rajesh were arrested on 10.3.2000. During interrogation, one 12 bore cartridge loaded country made pistol was recovered from right pocket of the wearing trouser of Rajesh, which was taken into Police possession. On the next day i.e. 11.3.2000 accused Sajjan, Narender and Rajesh suffered disclosure statements and as per disclosure statement Sajjan got recovered 2 kgs. of small Ilaichi plastic box, two silver coins, one idol of Ganesh, one country made pistol and one cartridge. Accused Narender got recovered currency notes of `5313/- wrapped in a bill and one silver coin from some other place. Accused Rajesh also got recovered one silver idol of Luxmi and other silver idol of Ganesh along with two silver coins in pursuance of his disclosure statement. The articles were taken into Police possession vide recovery memos. Site plans were prepared. Statements of witnesses were recorded. After necessary investigation, the challan was presented in Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [5] Court. On presentation of challan, the trial Court finding prima facie case against accused, framed charges for the offences under Sections 392 , 397 and 382 IPC against all the accused, whereas charge for the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act was framed against accused Rajesh. The accused pleaded not guilty to above charges and claimed trial. In support of its case, the prosecution examined PW-1 Raj Kumar complainant, who mainly deposed as per prosecution version. He also stated that he found all the four accused present in Court committing theft in his shop on that day. PW-2 Ashok Kumar, who has also seen the occurrence deposed the same facts. He also deposed that accused Sunita was apprehended at the spot while three accused managed to escape. He also stated that after hearing the sound of shutter, he came down and found that accused present in the Court were committing theft in the shop of Raj Kumar. PW-3 Bhagat Singh, SI mainly deposed regarding joining in the investigation of this case with Inspector CIA, Rewari. He deposed regarding arrest of the accused and disclosures and recoveries made from them. PW-4 SI/SHO Suraj Bhan deposed regarding initial investigation of this case and regarding sending the `Ruqa' and then registration of FIR and further arresting accused Sunita and preparing rough site plan Ex.PK. PW-5 Hans Raj mainly deposed that on receiving the `Ruqa', he recorded the formal FIR Ex.PA/2. PW-6 ASI Jagdish Singh mainly deposed that on 11.3.2000 he was joined by Bhagat Singh, ASI and deposed regarding Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [6] interrogation of accused Sajjan, Narender and Rajesh and deposed regarding the recoveries made by the accused in pursuance of their disclosure statements. PW-7 Inspector Om Parkash deposed regarding the arrest of the accused on 10.3.2000 and recovery of the pistol from the person of accused Rajesh. PW-8 SI Tula Ram mainly deposed regarding preparing of report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. on completion of the investigation. PW-9 HC Dharambir Singh also deposed regarding joining in the investigation of this case by Jagdish Singh, ASI and deposed regarding recoveries in pursuance of disclosure statements made by accused Sajjan, Narender and Rajesh. At the close of prosecution evidence, the accused were examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and were confronted with the evidence of the prosecution, but they denied the correctness of the evidence and pleaded themselves as innocent. It is also stated that they had been falsely implicated in this case. In defence, the accused examined DW-1 Sunita herself as witness and she mainly deposed that she was sitting at Railway Station at 12.00/12.30 in the noon. The Police came there and picked her from the Railway Station. Thereafter, the Police had taken her in the Police Station. She had never told the names of other accused persons to the Police. After going through the evidence and material on record, the learned trial Court vide its impugned judgment and order convicted and sentenced the accused-appellants for the offences as mentioned above. Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [7] At the time of arguments, learned counsel for the appellants argued that no offence under Sections 382, 392 read with Section 397 IPC is made out from the version of the prosecution. At the most, it could be held as a theft case. Learned counsel for the appellants further argued that the identity of the accused-appellants has not been established in the present case. Learned counsel for the appellants next argued that sanction under Section 25 of the Arms Act has not been proved. Therefore, appellant- Rajesh cannot be convicted on this ground. On the other hand, learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondent-State argued that the case of the prosecution has been duly proved. The appellants have committed robbery. Stolen articles were recovered from the accused-appellants, whereas accused-Sunita was apprehended at the spot. A country made pistol was recovered from accused Rajesh. He has also fired shot from the pistol at the time of occurrence. Therefore, the offence under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC is duly proved against the appellants. He also argued that the pistol was recovered from appellant Rajesh, therefore, offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act was also proved by the PWs. He further argued that there being no merit in the appeals, these should be dismissed. I have heard learned counsel for the appellants and learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondent-State and with their assistance have gone through the evidence on record minutely and carefully. Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [8] From the evidence on record, I find that when the appellants have been convicted under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC, which is aggravated form of robbery, therefore, there is no need to convict the appellants for the offence under Section 382 IPC also. Therefore, the conviction and sentence recorded against all the appellants for the offence under Section 382 IPC is set aside. As regards the offence under Section 392 IPC, I find that the definition of robbery has been given under Section 390 IPC and as per Section 390 IPC "Robbery" includes theft or extortion. "Theft is "robbery" if, in order to the committing of the theft, or in committing the theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by the theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint." In view of the above definition, in no way, it can be held that it is a case of theft. Rather, while carrying away the stolen articles one of the accused-appellant Rajesh fired shot from the pistol. Therefore, they committed the theft and while carrying away the property obtained by theft they put the complainant and other persons in the fear of instant death or of instant hurt. So 'Robbery" under Section 392 IPC is duly proved and it is not a case of theft. Again Section 397 IPC says that if, at the time of committing robbery or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to cause death or grievous hurt to any person, the imprisonment with which such Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [9] offender shall be punished shall not be less than seven years. In the present case, it is in the evidence that the offenders used the deadly weapon by firing towards the witnesses, who had escaped unhurt. Therefore, the offence under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC is proved against the appellants. As per evidence on record, Sunita was apprehended on the spot by the complainant and the people gathered there. She disclosed the names of other accused-appellants. Narender- appellant is her husband. Further, as per the evidence, Sajjan-appellant made disclosure statement and got recovered 2 kgs. of small Ilaichi plastic box, two silver coins, one idol of Ganesh, one country made pistol and one cartridge. Similarly, appellant-Narender got recovered currency notes of `5313/- wrapped in a bill as stated in the FIR and one silver coin which was stolen from the shop. Similarly, appellant-Rajesh as per his disclosure statement got recovered one silver idol of Luxmi and one silver idol of Ganesh along with two silver coins which had been stolen from the shop. Keeping in view these recoveries and in view of the statements of the PWs, who identified these appellants in the Court, all these appellants had committed the robbery and it has been duly proved by the PWs that they had committed the offence under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC. There is no dispute regarding their identity as the PWs had seen them at the time of occurrence and it is even in the FIR that the accused could be identified if produced before the complainant. Learned counsel for the appellants has placed reliance on the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ravindra alias Ravi Bansi Gohar Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [10] v. The State of Maharashtra, 1998 (3) RCR (Cr.) 766, in which it is held that evidence shows that photograph of accused persons were shown to PWs. It made the identification parade worthless. As in the present case, identification parade has not taken place, therefore, the law laid down in this judgement is having distinguished facts and will not apply to this case. Learned counsel for the appellants further placed reliance on the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohanlal Gangaram Gehani v. State of Maharashtra , AIR 1982 SC 839, in which it is held that no test identification parade was held to test his power of identification and the accused was also shown to the victim by the Police before the trial. It was held that his identification in Court by the victim is valueless and cannot be relied upon. The law laid down in this judgement is having distinguished facts and will not apply in the present case, as there are no such facts in the case in hand. Learned counsel for the appellants further placed reliance on the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Shamsher Singh v. State of Haryana , 2011 (2) RCR (Cr.) 235, in which it is held that the accused were muffled faces and there was a darkness at the time of dacoity. Identification parade was not held. Accused was shown to the witness in the Police station. It was held that identification in the Court becomes meaningless. Again the law laid down in this judgement is having distinguished facts and will not apply to this case. On the other hand, learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana placed reliance on the judgement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Amitsingh Bhikamsingh Thakur v. State of Maharasthra, 2007(1) Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [11] R.C.R. (Cr.) 618, in which it is held that there is no provision in Criminal Procedure Code which obliges the investigating agency to hold or confer a right upon the accused to claim, a test identification parade. They do not constitute substantive evidence and these parades are essentially governed by Section 162 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Failure to hold a test identification parade would not make inadmissible the evidence of identification in Court. In appropriate cases, the Court may accept the evidence of identification even without insisting on corroboration. However, much evidentiary value cannot be attached to the identification of the accused in Court where identifying witness is a total stranger who had just a fleeting glimpse of the person identified or who had no particular reason to remember the person concerned, if the identification is made for the first time in Court. I have gone through the law laid down in this judgement The law laid down in this judgement fully applies to the facts of the present case. The complainant and the other eye witnesses reached on the spot. The accused-appellants were committing robbery. Persons gathered there at the spot. They chased the accused-appellants. One of the accused fired from his pistol and then ran way. One of the accused was apprehended on the spot. It is also in the FIR that they could identify the accused if produced before the complainant. Therefore, keeping in view the facts and circumstances, the identification in the Court cannot be held inadmissible in evidence. Learned Additional Advocate General further placed reliance on the judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Simon and others v. State of Karnataka, Criminal Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [12] Appeal Nos.149-150 of 2002, decided on 29.1.2004, in which it is held that non-holding of test identification parade is not fatal where the identification of the accused by the witness in the Court in absence of test identification parade, was reliable and when it is corroborated by evidence of other eye-witnesses, who deposed to have seen the accused at the place of occurrence, conviction on the basis of testimony of said witness is sustainable. I have gone through the law laid down in this judgement. The same also fully applies to the facts and circumstances of the present case. Therefore, from the above discussion, I find that identity of the accused-appellants has been duly proved by the witnesses. Therefore, from the above discussion, I find that the PWs have consistently deposed against the appellants. They have no enmity or motive to falsely depose against the appellants. Otherwise also, the PWs have deposed consistently. There are no material contradictions or improvements in the statements of the PWs, which may make their statements unreliable. There is also nothing in the cross-examination of these PWs. The PWs are truthful, trustworthy and reliable witnesses. Therefore, the prosecution has duly proved its case against all the appellants under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC and the conviction of all the appellants under Section 392 read with Section 397 IPC is upheld. As regards, the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act against appellant-Rajesh, I find that in the present case, no sanction by the Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh Cr. Appeal Nos.S-980-SB of 2001 etc. [13] District Magistrate has been proved on the record by the prosecution. The sanction of the District Magistrate to launch the prosecution against accused under the Arms Act is necessary but no sanction has been proved, therefore, on this ground the conviction and sentence of appellant-Rajesh for the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act is set aside and he is acquitted of the charge framed under Section 25 of the Arms Act. Resultantly, with the above modifications in conviction and sentence, the criminal appeals are partly allowed and the impugned judgment of conviction and order of sentence recorded by the learned trial Court are partly set aside. All the accused-appellants are acquitted of the charge for the offence under Section 382 IPC as framed against them. Appellant-Rajesh in Criminal Appeal No.S-1170-SB of 2001 is also acquitted of the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act. The sentence of the appellants was suspended by this Court and they were released on bail during the pendency of the appeals. As they are on bail, their bail/surety bonds stand cancelled. They are directed to surrender themselves before the jail authorities immediately for completing remainder of sentence, failing which the concerned authority shall proceed against them in accordance with law. September 2, 2013. (Inderjit Singh) Judge *hsp* Parmar Harpal Singh 2013.09.17 11:20 I attest to the accuracy and integrity of this document Chandigarh