Dr. Ravinder Pratap vs Dr. Mrs. Suman Gupta on 10 January, 2011 1 IN THE COURT OF SMT. BIMLA KUMARI ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE (NORTH) : DELHI Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Case I.D No. 02401R0226302010 Dr. Ravinder Pratap S/o Late Sh. K.S. Premi R/o 148, New Surya Kiran Apartment 65, I.P Extension, Delhi ...REVISIONIST V e r s u s Dr. Mrs. Suman Gupta Professor/Dean Indraprastha University Law School, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Kashmere Gate, Delhi ...RESPONDENT Date of institution: 28.05.10 Arguments heard: 29.11.10 and 06.01.11 Judgment announced: 10.01.11 ORDER By the present order, I shall dispose of the revision petition filed by revisionist Dr. Ravinder Pratap U/S 397 read with Sections 399 / 400 CrPC against the order of Ld. MM dated 27.04.10. Vide the impugned order, Ld. MM dismissed the complaint of the revisionist. Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 1/9 2 2 Brief facts giving rise to filing of present revision are that the revisionist Dr. Ravinder Pratap filed a complaint U/S 190 CrPC against the respondent Dr. Mrs. Suman Gupta U/S 499 read with Section 500 IPC. It was the case of revisionist that respondent had written certain letters to the Vice Chancellor of Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University [hereinafter referred to as 'University'], wherein wild allegations and imputations were made against the revisionist. The revisionist came to know the contents of the letters/communications under Right to Information Act , which were supplied to him by the Public Information Officer. It was the case of revisionist that the contents of the aforesaid letters sent to the Vice- Chancellor by the respondent were not only defamatory but were without any reasons and had been published deliberately with an intention to defame the revisionist and the reputation of the revisionist was affected not only in the eyes of society but in the eyes of his colleagues, staff, universities and institutions in India and abroad. 3 The revisionist had examined four witnesses to prove his case during the pre-summoning evidence. After going through the evidence of witnesses, examined by the revisionists and hearing the arguments from the counsel for revisionist, Ld. Trial Courts dismissed the complaint of revisionist. It was inter-alia held by Ld. Trial Court that letters dated 08.08.05 Ex. CW1/3 was an official Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 2/9 3 communication made by the respondent in her capacity as Dean of Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University to the Vice- Chancellor of the University. The said letter was not the one, which was circulated to all and sundery. Ld. Trial Court was of the opinion that the requirement of offence of defamation as defined U/S 499 IPC was not satisfied, as imputations were not made in public nor it was made available to public. Ld. Trial Court also held that the other letters dated 23.09.09 and 30.06.08 were not circulars but were official communications by the office bearer of the University addressed to the Vice-Chancellor of the University. 4 "Ld. Trial Court has further held that the order of summoning anyone to face trial is serious issue. It is the duty of Magistrate to be fully satisfied at least prima facie, that facts disclose all ingredients of offence. If offence is not completely established, then Magistrate may not summon the accused. In a case for prosecution for defamation, Court is not only required to see whether complaint is filed to settle personal enmity but is also to see whether basic ingredients of offence are established or not. In this case, alleged defamatory contents are of official communication. It was not letter circulated to all. Moreover, even Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 3/9 4 if contents of letter show that language is harsh, but reading the letter as a whole would show that letter was issued by Dean of University to Vice-Chancellor of University for taking action against complainant herein for his alleged misconduct. Whether those alleged misconduct is correct or not is something within administrative domain of University. But one thing is clear from facts that intention to defame, to my mind, is not made out from these documents. Specifically, when letter dated 08.08.05 also says that complainant had sent e-mail to Dr. Suman Gupta, regarding which complaint is silent whether complainant had sent said e- mail or not, extract of which is also reproduced in said letter. One cannot lose sight of fact that one whose administratively subordinate is not required to send threats to his superior and thereafter when superior wishes to bring those facts to Administrative Head, it does not become defamatory. Requirement of offence of defamation does not cover such like situation. Ld. Trial Court has further held, "in view of the law and case law discussed above and case is well covered within the exception of Section 499 IPC. Moreover, I am of the view that it is not a case where prima facie offence is made out even for Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 4/9 5 summoning, consequently, I do not find that offence is made out, hence, complaint stands dismissed." 5 The grounds taken in the revision by the revisionist are that the impugned order dated 27.04.10 passed by Ld.Trial Court is wrong on the facts as well as in law; that Ld. Trial has failed to appreciate that the stage of deciding whether the respondent had acted in good faith or not has not arrived yet as this question could have been decided only when plea of respondent was recorded which is a matter of trial after leading evidence; that Ld. Trial Court has failed to appreciate the law that the question of applications of two exceptions to Section 499 IPC as well as other defence, that might be available to the respondent, should have been considered during trial and not at the stage of enquiry U/S 202 CrPC ; that Ld.Trial Court has committed serious error while making a wrong observation that at the stage of taking cognizance of the offence U/S 499 IPC , it is also to be seen that the imputation is not within any of the exceptions as provided U/S 499 IPC ; that Ld. Trial Court has committed grave error while holding that the requirement of the offence of defamation as defined U/S 499 IPC is not completely satisfied; that Ld. Trial Court has wrongly held that the case was covered within 8th and 9th exceptions of Section 499 IPC. 6 I have heard arguments from ld. counsel for revisionist. I have perused the revision file as well as the trial court record. Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 5/9 6 7 In M.A. Rumugam V. Kittu alias Krishnamoorthy, AIR 2009 SC 341, Hon'ble Supreme Court dismissed the appeal filed by appellant against the judgment of Hon'ble Madras High Court. In that case, the respondent filed a complaint against the appellant for the commission of offence of defamation U/S 500 IPC . Ld. Trial Court issued summons to appellant. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the summoning order, the appellant filed a petition before the Hon'ble Madras High Court praying therein to call for the records and quash the proceedings against him and dismiss the petition filed by the respondent. It was held by Hon'ble Madras High Court that the accusation have been made the accused [sic] and there are prima facie materials to proceed against the petitioner. When there are specific allegations made in the complaint against the accused, such allegations may have to be rebutted during the course of trial. In such circumstances by invoking the inherent powers under Section 482 CrPC the pending proceedings cannot be quashed at the threshold. I do not find any merit in the case, hence, the petition is dismissed. 8 In appeal, Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is now a well-settled principle of law that those who plead exception must Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 6/9 7 prove it. The burden of proof that his action was bonafide would, thus, be on the appellant alone. It was further held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that at this stage, it would have been premature for the High Court to consider the materials placed by the appellant before it so as to arrive at a definite conclusion that there was no element of bad faith on the part of the appellant in making the said complaint before the police authorities. 9 The judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rumugam's case was considered by the Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Tata Motors Ltd. V. State while disposing of the Crl. Rev. petition No. 16/08 decided on 12.02.09. In that case, the revision petition was filed by the petitioner against the order of Ld. MM dated 09.10.07 whereby Ld. MM has dismissed the complaint filed by the petitioner i.e. Tata Motors Ltd. Ld. Trial Court held in its order dated 09.10.07 that " the intention of the writer does not seem to defame the complainant or harm the reputation of the complainant. No malice can be made out from the article...no cognizance can be taken of the offences on the basis of the allegations, as no prima facie case is made out". Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 7/9 8 10 Hon'ble Delhi High Court has allowed the petition by holding that a perusal of the impugned order shows that the learned MM has not merely discussed the merits of the complaint, but has indeed exceeded his jurisdiction in considering whether the respondents would have a valid defence under the doctrine of 'good faith'. 11 It was further held by Hon'ble Delhi High Court that the question before the learned MM at the pre-summoning stage was not whether the defence of good faith was made out. Such question would arise for consideration only at the post-summoning stage when the accused are called upon to lead their defence and if and when they seek to show that the article in question was published in good faith. Any other defence that the accused may have would also be required to be considered only at the stage of trial. At the present stage all that the learned MM was required to do was to form an opinion whether on the basis of the complaint and the pre-summoning evidence, a prima facie case was made out for the offences mentioned in the complaint. The learned MM was not required to do anything more at this stage. In the considered view of Court, the learned MM had exceeded his jurisdiction in considering a defence which could possibly arise only at a later Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 8/9 9 stage. 12 The judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rumugam 's case was again considered by Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Ved Kumar Gupta and Ors. V. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal and Ors.Crl . M.C 1925/08 decided on 20.04.09. 13 In the present case, after going through the material on record, I am of the considered view that Ld. Trial Court has also exceeded its jurisdiction by holding that the case of respondent is covered within the exception of Section 499 IPC. Accordingly, the impugned order dated 27.04.10 passed by ld. Trial Court is hereby set aside. Ld. Trial Court is directed to hear the matter afresh in view of the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court and Hon'ble Delhi High Court discussed in this order and to take a fresh decision whether or not a prima facie case for summoning the respondent is made out on tshe basis of material on record. 14 With these observations, the revision filed by revisionist stands disposed of. Trial court record alongwith copy of this order be sent back. Revisionist will appear before Ld. Trial Court on 17.01.2011. Revision file be consigned to Record Room. Announced in the open court today (Smt. Bimla Kumari) on 10.01.2011 ASJ(North)/Tis Hazari,Delhi. Criminal Revision No. 35/10 Page 9/9