M/S Bennet Coleman & Co. Ltd vs Sh. Ashok Jain on 7 October, 2013 IN THE COURT OF SH. NARINDER KUMAR ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE(CENTRAL): DELHI RBT Criminal Appeal No.70/2013 (22.04.2013) Old Criminal Appeal No. 17/11 (28.02.2011) Date of Judgment: 07.10.2013 In the matter of:- M/s Bennet Coleman & Co. Ltd. Times House, 7-Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-110103 ....Appellant Versus Sh. Ashok Jain B-2/4, Safdarjung Enclave, New Delhi. ....Respondent JUDGMENT Present appeal has been filed by the appellant company (accused before Learned Trial Magistrate in complaint case no.23/1/98/10). Vide impugned judgment dated 01.02.2011, learned Trial Magistrate has held the accused appellant and co-accused Raminder Singh, Resident Editor guilty of the offence punishable under Section 500 IPC and sentenced the company-appellant to pay fine of Rs.10,000/- whereas the co-accused Raminder Singh, Resident Editor has been sentenced to undergo Simple Imprisonment for one year and to pay fine of Rs.5000/-, or in default of payment of fine to undergo SI for three months. 2. Substance of accusation levelled against both the accused as available in the notice served upon them on 19.07.2005 before the Trial Court reads as under:- "It is alleged against you that you Raminder Singh being 1 resident editor of Times of India daily newspaper, and the company owner of the newspaper published from New Delhi, on 21.02.1997 published imputations at Page 3 Col.1 concerning Mr. Ashok Jain complainant of the case regarding his involvement in criminal cases of murder, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation as you have reasons to believe that such imputations will harm the reputation of Ashok Kumar Jain and you intended to harm his reputation by publishing the news item during the municipal elections of 1997 and committed an offence under Section 500 IPC and within my cognizance." 3. Before the Trial Court, the company was represented by Shri Rajiv Yadav, its Authorised Representative. Since accused pleaded not guilty and claimed trial, complainant stepped into the witness box as PW1 and also examined PW2 Sh. Virender Rajput. 4. So far as appellant-company is concerned, Sh. Rajiv Yadav, its AR when examined under Section 313 CrPC put forth following defence plea:- "That the company is the owner of Times of India newspaper and the news publication is the responsibility of Editorial Board consisting of different editors for different sections of the newspaper. The management has no role in selection of news item. The responsibilities for different sections like metro, business, sports, etc., of the newspaper are entrusted to Section Editors. These Section Editors determine and vet the news items to be printed in their section of the newspapers." 5. Arguments heard. File perused. 6. Learned counsel for the appellant has contended that the complainant failed to established before Learned Trial Magistrate by leading cogent and convincing evidence that on account of publication of the questioned news item, his reputation was harmed in any manner in the estimation of others. 7. Another contention raised by learned counsel for the appellant is that in view of the provisions of The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867 2 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), it is only the Editor who is responsible for publication of the newspaper, he being the one who controls selection of the matter i.e. published in a newspaper and as such the company, who is a juristic personality, is not criminal liable for publication of any such news item. Therefore, learned counsel for the appellant has urged that this appeal be allowed and the impugned judgment of conviction and order on sentence be set aside. 8. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has contended that for the reasons recorded by learned Metropolitan Magistrate on the basis of evidence led by the complainant, there is no merit in this appeal and the same deserves to be dismissed. 9. As per averments put forth in the criminal complaint, Ashok Kumar Jain - respondent herein first of all described as to how he enjoyed good reputation, had a clean record and no involvement in any kind of controversy. Then he disclosed as to how he had lost election of Indian National Congress (I) for the legislature assembly Delhi, held in 1993. He again contested election of Municipal Corporation of Delhi from Ward No.13 Hauz Khan constituency. Elections were to be held on 23.02.97, but on 21.02.97 one of news items in the daily newspaper "The Times of India" published on 21.02.97 was under the title "233 aspirants for criminal record". As regards the complainant, para - 4 of the news item read as under : "That since it become as known fact that the complainant had created an edge over his opposite candidates, at that juncture for the elections which were to be held on 23.02.1997, the accused persons 3 published a new item in the daily newspapers known as Times Of India on 21.02.1997 at page 3 col.1 under the heading "223 aspirants for criminal record" by a staff Reporter. So far as the complainant is concerned, para 4 of the news item reads as under:- "On them, are the cong., BJP, JD candidates from Hauz Khas Virender Singh (Janta Dal) candidate is reportedly involved in cases of murder, dacoity and robbery. The Con. Candidate, Ashok Jain, is involved in a case of murder, attempt to murder and criminal intimidation." Complainant alleged that the aforesaid item was defamatory in nature, totally false and published with sole intention to defame him, tarnish his image knowing well and also to minimize the chance of winning his elections going to be held on 27.02.97. 10. After service of notice U/s 251 Cr.P.C . of the accused, the complainant stepped into witness box as PW1 and tendered into evidence as affidavit Ex.C1. In his affidavit Ex.C1, he reiterated the allegations put forth in the complaint. He also examined CW2 Sh. Vijender Rajput. 11. Sec.499 of IPC provides as under :- "Defamation - Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1 - xxxxx Explanation 2 - xxxxx Explanation 3 - xxxxx Explanation 4 - No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful." 4 Sec.11 of IPC defines "person" as under :- "11. "Person" - The word "person" includes any Company or Association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not." In Keki Hormusji Gharda & Ors. V. Mehervan Rustom Irani & anr., (2009) 6 SCC 475, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under :- "17. The Penal Code, 1860 save and except in some matters does not contemplate any vicarious liability on the part of a person. Commission of an offence by raising a legal fiction or by creating a vicarious liability in terms of the provisions of a statute must be expressly stated." As regards provision of Act, 1867, Sec.3 of the Act provides as under :- "3. Particulars to be printed on books and papers - Every book or paper printed within India shall have printed legibly on it the name of the printer and the place of printing, and (if the book or paper be published) the name of the publisher, and the place of publication. Sec.5(1) of the Act provides as under :- "Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 3 , every copy of every such newspaper shall contain the names of the owner and editor thereof printed clearly on such copy and also the date of its publication." Section 1 of the Act defines "Editor" as under :- "Editor" means the person who controls the selection of the matter that is published in a newspaper." Sec.7 of the Act reads as under :- "Office copy of declaration to be prima facie evidence - In any legal proceeding whatever, as well civil as criminal, the production of a copy of such declaration as is aforesaid, attested by the seal of some Court empowered by this Act to have the custody of such declarations, or, in the case of the editor, a copy of the newspaper containing his name printed on it as that of the editor shall be held (unless the contrary be proved) to be sufficient evidence, as against the person whose name shall be subscribed to such declaration, or printed on such newspaper, as the case maybe that the said person was printer or publisher, or printer and publisher (according as the 5 words of the said declaration may be) of every portion of every newspaper whereof the title shall correspond with the title of the newspaper mentioned in the declaration, or the editor of every portion of that issue of the newspaper of which a copy is produced." So section 7 raises a presumption that a person whose name is printed in a copy of the newspaper is the editor of every portion of that issue. The presumption may be rebutted by evidence. In D. P. Mishra v Kamal Narayan Sharma and Ors , AIR 1971 Supreme Court 856, Hon'ble Apex Court observed that the copies of Mahakoshal dated April 12, April 26, and May 4, 1963, it was printed that Shukla was the Chief Editor. Shukla was also described as the printer and publisher of the newspaper. Accordingly, the Hon'ble Apex Court observed as under:- "The presumption under Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, undoubtedly arises, but in a charge under Section 123 (4) of the Representation of the People Act the presumption under Section 7 of the Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, would come with greater or less force, according to the circumstances to the aid of a person claiming that the editor was responsible for the publication and that the publication was to the knowledge of editor." In the case of Haji C. H. Mohammad Koya vs. T. K. S. M. A. Muthukoya , AIR 1979 SC 154, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:- "the object of the Press Act was to regulate printing presses and newspapers in order to preserve copies of newspapers and books. Moreover, in order to avoid multiplicity of suits and uncertainties of liabilities, it was considered necessary to choose one of the persons from the staff and make him liable for all the articles or matters published in the paper so that any person aggrieved may sue only the person so named under the provisions of the Press Act and is relieved from the necessity of making a fishing or roving enquiry about persons who may have been individually responsible for the offending matters published in the papers." 6 Hon'ble Apex Court further observed as under:- "It is obvious that a presumption under Section 7 of the Press Act can be drawn only if the person concerned is an editor within the meaning of Section 1 of the Press Act. Where however a person does not fulfill the conditions of Section 1 of the Press Act and does not perform the functions of an editor whatever may be his description or designation, the provisions of the Press Act would have no application." 12. As regards criminal liability of a juristic person, in a case involving commission of offence under Section 499 and 500 IPC, this Court has come across a decision by our own Hon'ble High Court in Raymond Ltd. & Ors vs. Rameshwar Das Dwarka Das Pvt. Ltd. Crl . M. C. 1124/2007 decided on 08.04.2013 by our own Hon'ble High Court, wherein a complaint under Section 499 read with Section 500 of the Indian Penal Code ( IPC ) was preferred by the Respondent against the Petitioners. Therein it was urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that first petitioner M/s Raymond Limited being a juristic person was having no mind of its own. While referring to decision in Kalpnath Rai vs. State, AIR 1988 SC 201, the learned counsel for the petitioner therein urged that in the absence of any criminal intent a corporation could not be held criminally liable for an offence requiring mens rea. In Raymond 's case, Hon'ble High Court has observed that in view of the law laid down on corporate criminal liability in Kalpnath Rai's case ( supra) & Iridum India Telecom Ltd. v Motorola Incorporated & Ors , (2011) 1 SCC 74, the earlier judgment of the Supreme Court in Kalpnath Rai shall have to be taken as a binding precedent. Hon'ble High court has further observed in 7 Raymond 's case (supra) that Iridium India Telecom ltd. must be taken to have been decided on its own facts and cannot be taken to have overruled Kalpnath Rai. Accordingly, it has been decided in the matter of Raymond 's case that since first petitioner could not possess any mens rea, it could not be held guilty of the offence under Section 499 and 500 IPC. Hon'ble Apex Court observed that in order to rebut this presumption the respondent will have to do with the publication of either the editorial or the news report or that any of them were written and or without h is consent. Therein, the respondent produced two documents to show that he was not discharging the duties as the editor of the newspaper due to his preoccupation in the Lok Sabha election and in his absence J. Verma news editor was discharging those duties, namely, of writing editorials and also editing the news reports. After his application dt. 15.01.1971 was seen by the Chairman and was taken note of by RW3 J.Verma both on the same day, the respondent did not have anything to do with the publication of the newspaper either with respect to the editorials or the news reports. J.Verma RW3 had admitted the document and has also that from 19.01.1971, the respondent did not have anything to do with writing of editorials or publication of the Kalinga. J. Verma RW3 had admitted in his evidence that he had been discharging the duties of the editor after the leave of absence was granted to the respondent. Therein, Learned counsel for the petitioners cited a decision of the Apex 8 Court in Kalpanath Rai's case (supra) wherein it was held in paragraph 57 of the report that :- "a company is not a natural person. Mens rea being an essential ingredient of offence under section 3(4) there is no question of prosecuting it for the same. In many recent penal statutes, companies or corporations are deemed to be offenders on the strength of the acts committed by person responsible for the management of the affairs of such company or corporation. But, there is no such provision in the Tada which makes the company liable for the acts of its officers. Hence, there is no scope whatsoever to prosecute a company for the offence under section 3(4) of Tada." 13. In the case of Zee Telefilms Ltd. V. M/s. Sahara India Commercial Corporation Ltd. & Anr., (2001) 1 CALLT. 262 HC, Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta held that intention to cause harm is the most essential sine qua non of an offence under Section 499 IPC. The Calcutta High Court held that since company is an artificial person or a juristic entity it is incapable of having any mind and hence question of having such a state of mind could not arise. It was, therefore, concluded that such a person cannot commit an offence of defamation. The Calcutta High Court relied on the report of the Supreme Court in Kalpnath Rai and held as under :- "8. Offence of defamation is defined in section 499 IPC. It is apparent from the very definition that intentional of the accused who make such imputation must be to harm the reputation or he must make it with knowledge or reasonable belief within such imputation will harm the reputation of the person concerned. Therefore, unless one makes the offending Imputation with such state of mind, he cannot be said to have committed such offences. Undoubtedly a company is a Juristic entity. The offence of defamation consists of three essential ingredients, namely, (i) making or publishing any imputation concerning any person, (ii) such imputation must have been made by words either spoken or intended to be read or by signs or by visible representation, and (iii) the said imputation must have been made with intention to harm or with knowledge or having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerned. Therefore, it is 9 apparent from the very definition of the offence as given in section 499 IPC that intention to cause harm is the most essential sine qua non of an offence under section 499 IPC. Question is whether a Juristic or artificial entity is capable of having such a state of mind? According to a decision of this Court in Snilakhya Chowdhury V. H.M.J.H. Jadwet , AIR 1968 Cal 266, a Juristic person and artificial person or a Juristic entity is incapable of having any mind and hence question of having such a state of mind cannot arise. It was, therefore, concluded such a person cannot commit an offence of defamation of which mens rea is one of the essential ingredients though the directors and other officers of such company maybe liable for committing such offences in certain circumstances. This Court in an earlier case in Anath Bandhu V. Corporation of Calcutta also held that a limited company cannot be prosecuted for an offence of which mens rea is an essential ingredient. It may be possible to prosecute a company for an offence which does not require mens rea or particular state of mind to be one of the essential ingredients of the offence. But, if the statute requires that mens rea is an essential ingredient of the offence, then a company cannot be prosecuted for such an offence as such company is incapable of having a mind or intention or mens rea." In Zee Telefilms Ltd. 's case (supra), the Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta has held as under:- "that in the penal code also there is no provision which makes a company or an association of persons liable for prosecution for the offences of which mens rea is one of the essential ingredients. It has been further observed that in this situation and in view of the aforesaid decision of the apex Court, it is apparent that if a statute defining the offence makes the mens rea or particular state of mind to be essential ingredients of such offence, a company or an association of person cannot be prosecuted for such offences though its officers or directors responsible for the management of the affairs of such company may be liable for prosecution. Similar view was expressed by Court in an earlier decision in AIR 1949 CAL 689, where it has been held that bank is a Juridical person and not an actual person. The bank as such cannot be said to have the mens rea required for the offence of cheating. The Bank as such cannot be punished for cheating because it has no physical body. Similar view was reiterated in a recent decision of this Court in a comparatively recent decision of this is A.K. Khosla V. T.S. Venkatesan , 1991(2) CRN 321." 14. In view of the above discussion and the well settled legal proposition, when this court finds that the appellant company cannot be said to possess an mens rea and having regard to the provisions of The Press and Registration of Books 10 Act, 1867, the appellant company could not be held liable for publication of the news item. 15. As a result, the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment of conviction and sentence of the accused - appellant company, passed by learned Trial Magistrate is hereby set aside. Appeal file be consigned to Record Room. Announced in Open Court on 07.10.2013 (Narinder Kumar ) Additional Sessions Judge(Central) Delhi. 11