Prof Dr. V. Phani Sree vs The State Of Telangana on 4 October, 2024 THE HONOURABLE SMT. JUSTICE K. SUJANA CRIMINAL PETITION Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 COMMON ORDER: Since the issue involved in both the criminal petitions is one and the same, they are being heard and disposed of together by way of this common order. 2. Criminal Petition Nos.4167 is filed by Accused No.2 and Criminal Petition No.4200 of 2023 is filed by Accused No.3 to quash the proceedings against them in C.C.No.115 of 2023 on the file of the learned VI Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad, Nampally, registered for the offences punishable under Sections 406, 465, 466, 468, 471, 469, 420, 418 and 500 read with 120-B and 34 of IPC . 3. The brief facts of the cases are that respondent No.2/defacto-complainant, filed a private complaint before the trial Court under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. stating that he is the Professor in Painting, Head of the Department of JNAFAU. On 29.05.2013, he made an application to the Principal, College of Fine Arts, Masab Tank, Hyderabad, requesting additional staff members for the smooth running of his Department and in pursuance of the said requisition, the University Authorities have released the 2 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 notification, dated 12.06.2013, for fulfilling the requisition made by him the Principal of College of Fine Arts addressed a letter, dated 17.06.2013 to the Registrar, JNAFAU and requested him to proceed with the selection process. It is further stated that, vide order dated 31.07.2013, respondent No.2 was called for an explanation stating that two female students have made allegations of sexual harassment against him and thereafter a committee was constituted, vide proceedings dated 08.08.2013 to enquire into the allegations and respondent No.2 submitted his explanation on 12.08.2013. Being not satisfied with the explanation submitted by respondent No.2, he was placed under suspension, vide proceedings No.C/3158 /Allegations/2013, dated 12.08.2013. 4. It is further stated that the accused initiated disciplinary action for the allegations of sexual harassment under the guise of disciplinary action and enquiry and constituted invalid committee without being any proper sanction or approval from the competent authority and the constitution of committee was illegal and invalid. Further, the management has suspended him and appointed several committees and deliberately delaying in bringing forth the true facts before the competent authority and getting appointed a proper enquiry officer to conclude the enquiry at the earliest, purposefully dragging the matter and keeping it pending since last 6½ years with 3 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 ulterior motives depriving and curtailing his chances to have a growth in his career. Therefore, he filed the complaint. Basing on the same, the trial Court took cognizance that the prima facie case is made out against the accused registered for the offences under Section 406 , 465 , 466 , 468 , 471 , 469 , 420 , 418 and 500 read with 120-B and 34 of the IPC . 5. Heard Sri Zainab Khan, learned counsel for the petitioners and Sri S. Ganesh, learned Assistant Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of respondent No.1/State. Perused the record. 6. Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that even assuming that the averments made in the complaint are taken into account as true, they do not constitute the offences alleged against the petitioners. Learned counsel further submits that the present complaint is filed only as a counterblast to the enquiry proceedings being conducted by the University and the entire complaint revolves around the discharging of duties by the petitioners in their official capacity and they have been discharging their duties in good faith. It is also submitted that the offences under Sections 465 , 466 , 468 , 469 and 471 of the IPC relate to documents and property marks and that there is no specific allegation in respect of which document or record has allegedly been forged or used as a genuine document, 4 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 and further, respondent No.2 failed to question the veracity of any particular document or record of the University. It is further submitted that respondent No.2 has made a vague and omnibus allegation that one of the members of the Executive Council of the University had pointed out some discrepancies that had allegedly crept into the minutes of 2nd Executive Council Meeting held on 21.04.2018. 7. Learned counsel further submitted that in order to attract the provision of Section 420 of IPC, there must be fraudulent, dishonest intention exist from the inception, when the promise or representation was made. In the present case, there is no allegation in the complaint that with regard to malafide intention on the part of the petitioners from the inception when the promise or representation was made and there is no allegation regarding inducement on the part of the petitioners to deliver any property to any person. 8. Learned counsel further submits that for the offence criminal breach of trust to be alleged, the accused should dishonestly misappropriate or convert to his own use property entrusted to him. But in the present case there is no property entrusted to the petitioners by respondent No.2. Therefore, section 5 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 418 of IPC is also not attracted to the petitioners as the nature of allegations made against respondent No.2 relate to sexual harassment, which amounts to grave misconduct. Therefore, respondent No.2 cannot claim that the petitioners were bound to protect his interest over and above the interests and welfare of the students of the University. Learned counsel further submits that apart from officiating as the Registrar and Vice Chancellor of the University, the petitioners have not made or published any imputations against respondent No.2 in any form, which can be deemed to defamatory statements in order to attract the offence under Section 499 of I.P.C. and all the acts performed by the petitioners, including issuing proceedings as officials of the University, are the acts performed in good faith and the said acts do not fall within the act of "defamation". Further, the complaint itself does not refer to any single act that would amount to defamation and merely makes reference to acts performed by the petitioners in discharge of their official duties. 9. Learned counsel for the petitioners further submits that respondent No.2 has arrayed the petitioners as a party only with an intention to harass them and to gain undue advantage as the petitioners are holding the post of Registrar/Vice Chancellor of the University, which is the post respondent No.2 was previously 6 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 holding8 for. Without any sound reason and logic, respondent No.2 has questioned the mentioning of the pending enquiry proceedings against him at the time of issuance of No Objection Certificate and Service Certificate in his favour and has portrayed as he was being targeted by the University authorities. Learned counsel further submits that the petitioners are not part of the selection process for "Academic Assistant" and hence the allegation made by respondent No.2 that his involvement as a member of the selection process was intolerable to the petitioners is farfetched and unreasonable. It is further submitted that prior to the issuance of the legal notice, dated 30.07.2013, complaints from several female students have been received by the University against respondent No.2 on similar allegations of sexual harassment, more particularly in the year 1995 and 2010. The students of the University also filed a complaint against respondent No.2 vide FIR No.421 of 2013 on the file of the CCS, Hyderabad, registered for the offences punishable under Section 354 , 354-A , 354-D and 506 of the Indian Penal Code and after completion of investigation the same was numbered as C.C.No.4217 of 2019. In the interests of the female students of the University and given the fact that the matter had to be handled in a time and sensitive manner, it was unanimously decided by the 7 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 officials of the University to relieve respondent No.2 as the Head of Department of Painting. 10. Learned counsel for the petitioners further submitted that in complaint respondent No.2 stated that there was delay on part of the petitioners to conclude the enquiry proceedings against him and that the enquiry has been purposefully dragged on, however, the delay in enquiry proceedings is not attributable to the petitioners in any manner, as they were not responsible for certain exigencies arising such as the members of the Enquiry Committee recusing themselves or the failure on the part of the previously appointed Inquiry the failure on part of the previously, appointed Inquiry Officers to initiate inquiry and submit their enquiry reports within the stipulated period. It is further submitted that the averments made in the complaint do not make out any case to attract the offences alleged and hence the said complaint is unsustainable. That apart, there are no specific allegations regarding any specific act attributable to the petitioners in their personal capacity, as the petitioners have only carried out their duties in their official capacity and in the absence of any specific allegations and overt acts attributable to the petitioners, their implication in criminal proceedings of such nature is a clear abuse of law and continuation of such proceedings would render clear miscarriage of justice and 8 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 prayed to quash the proceedings. Learned counsel relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in State of Haryana and others vs. Bhajan Lal 1. Learned counsel further submits that as per Section 197 of Cr.P.C. no Court shall take cognizance of any offence alleged to have been committed by any public servants while acting or purporting to act in discharge of their official duty, except with the previous sanction of the Government. In the instant case, no sanction has been taken. Therefore, the proceedings against the petitioners are need to be quashed. 11. On the other hand, the learned counsel for respondent No.2 would submit that protection under Section 197 of Cr.P.C. has certain limits and is available only when the alleged act done by the public servant is reasonably connected with the discharge of his official duty and is not merely a cloak for doing the objectionable act. He further submitted that, in the instant case, the acts of the petitioners have not even any remote link with any official acts and duties and, therefore, Section 197 of Cr.P.C. is not necessary. Further, the allegations leveled against the petitioners are to be decided only after full-fledged trial and therefore, prayed this Court to dismiss the Criminal Petitions. 1 Air 1992 SC 604 9 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 12. Having regard to the submissions and material available on record that the petitioners filed the petition under Section 482 of Cr.P.C and this Court has to see whether the averments constitute the alleged offences against the petitioners. 13. In the present case, respondent No.2 made private complaint before the trial Court for the offences under Sections 406 , 465 , 466 , 468 , 471 , 469 , 420 , 418 and 500 read with 120-B and 34 of I.P.C . A perusal of the complaint would show that the total allegations against the accused are with regard to the manipulations and misrepresentations made to the earlier Monitoring and Development Council (M.D.C) as well as the 1st Executive Council. While the complainant was not even furnished with the charge sheet, and the date of serving of the Enquiry Report to him. Further, instead of calling for the enquiry report of Prof. Mallesh, some other enquiry report comprising of six pages without any details of the committee and its Appointing Authority was annexed to the notes of the 2nd Executive Council, dated 21.04.2019 and the MDC resolutions contradicting to their own statements apart from observing that the Enquiry Officer Prof. S. Mallesh was nominated to be appointed by the then 31st MDC. Therefore, the allegations against the petitioners do not constitute the offences of forgery. 10 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 14. The main allegations against the petitioners is that they have deliberately dragged on the matter for no valid reason as is evidenced by the documents filed along with this complaint, which categorically establishes the fraud played by the petitioners, by creating, doctoring and fabricating such of the incident which were non-existent and mis-representing such facts by mis-stating differently before different superiors like MDC and EC, which were totally mislead by the mis-stated representations made by the petitioners with the whole intention of strangulating the career prospects of respondent No.2 and tarnishing his image, character and good will earned by him. All allegations made against the petitioners are that they have not conducted the enquiry in a proper manner and they are responsible and defamation of respondent No.2. 15. In Rakesh Kumar Mishra vs. State of Bihar and others 2 the Apex Court held as under:- "6.The protection given under Section 197 is to protect responsible public servants against the institution of possibly vexatious criminal proceedings for offences alleged to have been committed by them while they are acting or purporting to act as public servants. The policy of the legislature is to afford adequate protection to public servants to ensure that they are not prosecuted for anything done by them in the discharge of their official duties without reasonable cause, and if sanction is granted, to confer on the Government, if it chooses to exercise it, complete 2 (2006)1 SCC 557 11 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 control of the prosecution. This protection has certain limits and is available only when the alleged act done by the public servant is reasonably connected with the discharge of his official duty and is not merely a cloak for doing the objectionable act. If in doing his official duty, he acted in excess of his duty, but there is a reasonable connection between the act and the performance of the official duty, the excess will not be a sufficient ground to deprive the public servant from the protection. The question is not as to the nature of the offence such as whether the alleged offence contained an element necessarily dependent upon the offender being a public servant, but whether it was committed by a public servant acting or purporting to act as such in the discharge of his official capacity. Before Section 197 can be invoked, it must be shown that the official concerned was accused of an offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties. It is not the duty which requires examination so much as the act, because the official act can be performed both in the discharge of the official duty as well as in dereliction of it. The act must fall within the scope and range of the official duties of the public servant concerned. It is the quality of the act which is important and the protection of this section is available if the act falls within the scope and range of his official duty. There cannot be any universal rule to determine whether there is a reasonable connection between the act done and the official duty, nor is it possible to lay down any such rule. One safe and sure test in this regard would be to consider if the omission or neglect on the part of the public servant to commit the act complained of could have made him answerable for a charge of dereliction of his official duty if the answer to this question is in the affirmative, it may be said that such act was committed by the public servant while acting in the discharge of his official duty and there was every connection with the act complained of and the official duty of the public servant. This aspect makes it clear that the concept of Section 197 does not get immediately attracted on institution of the complaint case. 13. If on facts, therefore, it is prima facie found that the act or omission for which the accused was charged had reasonable connection with discharge of his duty then it must be held to be official to which applicability of Section 197 of the Code cannot be disputed". 16. In the present case, the allegations made against the petitioners are while discharging their duties they mis-stated the 12 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 facts and dragged the enquiry, therefore the trial Court has to see that without sanction 197 (1) of Cr. P.C. cognizance cannot be taken against the public servant, whereas, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in S.K.Zutshi and another vs. Bimal Debnath and another3 observed as under:- "The protection given under Section 197 is to protect responsible public servants against the institution of possibly vexatious criminal proceedings for offences alleged to have been committed by them while they are acting or purporting to act as public servants. The policy of the legislature is to afford adequate protection to public servants to ensure that they are not prosecuted for anything done by them in the discharge of their official duties without reasonable cause, and if sanction is granted, to confer on the Government, if they choose to exercise it, complete control of the prosecution. This protection has certain limits and is available only when the alleged act done by the public servant is reasonably connected with the discharge of his official duty and is not merely a cloak for doing the objectionable act. If in doing his official duty, he acted in excess of his duty, but there is a reasonable connection between the act and the performance of the official duty, the excess will not be a sufficient ground to deprive the public servant from the protection. The question is not as to the nature of the offence such as whether the alleged offence contained an element necessarily dependent upon the offender being a public servant, but whether it was committed by a public servant acting or purporting to act as such in the discharge of his official capacity. Before Section 197 can be invoked, it must be shown that the official concerned was accused of an offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties. It is not the duty which requires examination so much as the act, because the official act can be performed both in the discharge of the official duty as well as in dereliction of it. The act must fall within the scope and range of the official duties of the public servant concerned. It is the quality of the act which is important and the protection of this section is available if the act falls within the scope and range of his official duty. There cannot be any universal rule to determine whether there is a reasonable connection between the act done 3 (2006)1 SCC 557 13 SKS,J Crl.P.Nos.4167 and 4200 of 2023 and the official duty, nor is it possible to lay down any such rule. One safe and sure test in this regard would be to consider if the omission or neglect on the part of the public servant to commit the act complained of could have made him answerable for a charge of dereliction of his official duty, if the answer to his question is in the affirmative, it may be said that such act was committed by the public servant while acting in the discharge of his official duty and there was every connection with the act complained of and the official duty of the public servant. This aspect makes it clear that the concept of Section 197 does not get immediately attracted on institution of the complaint case." 17. In the present case, the allegation against the petitioners is while discharging their duties they mis-stated the facts and as it is the function of the public servant sanction under Section 197 (1) of Cr.P.C. is necessary. Therefore, the trial Court taking cognizance against the petitioners is set aside as sanction 197 (1) of Cr.P.C . was not obtained. 18. Accordingly, both the Criminal Petitions are allowed and the cognizance order dated 11.01.2023 passed in C.C.No.115 of 2023 by the learned VI Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Hyderabad, Nampally is hereby set aside. Miscellaneous applications, if any pending, shall also stand closed. ___________ K. SUJANA, J Date:04.10.2024 Dsu