Sh. Shiv Kuar Bansal vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 16 May, 2009 IN THE COURT OF SHRI NAROTTAM KAUSHAL: ADDITIONAL SESSIONS JUDGE -II (NW): ROHINI COURTS: DELHI. DATE OF INSTITUTION:-31.10.2008. DATE ON WHICH RESERVED FOR ORDER:-14.05.2009. DATE OF ORDER:-16.05.2009. CRIMINAL REVISION NO.302/2008. 1. SH. SHIV KUAR BANSAL S/O. SH. ATTAR BANSAL 2. SH. SACHIN BANSAL S/O. SH. SHIV KUMAR BANSAL. 3. SMT. KANTI DEVI W/O. SH. SHIV KUMAR BANSAL. ALL RESIDENTS OF :- 12-B, HANS VIHAR, SECTOR-13, ROHINI, DELHI-110085. ALSO AT :- G-3/67, SECTOR-11, ROHINI, DELHI-110085. 4. SH. NITIN BANSAL S/O. SH. SHIV KUMAR BANSAL. R/O. 1587, MAMURPUR, NARELA MANDI, DELHI-110040. .....PETITIONERS VERSUS 1. THE STATE (NCT OF DELHI) 2. SMT. SHALU JAIN W/O. SH. NITIN BANSAL. D/O. SH. KISHAN KUMAR JAIN R/O. G-3/67, SECTOR-11, ROHINI, DELHI-110085. ....RESPONDENTS. ORDER DATED 15.09.2008 PASSED BY MS. SAMITA GARG, LEARNED MM, ROHINI COURT, DELHI IN FIR BEARING NO.1005/06, UNDER SECTION 341/34 IPC , PS-PARSHANT VIHAR, TITLED AS STATE VS SHIV KUMAR BANSALDELHI. ORDER 1.1.Challenge in the present Revision petition is to order dated 15.9.2008 passed by the learned MM vide which charge for offence punishable under section 341 read with 34 IPC has been framed against the petitioners. 2.1.It shall be pertinent to refer to some admitted facts between the parties. Complainant/Respondent and Petitioner No.4 got married on 26.01.2006. They separated from each other's company in March, 2006 and a petition under Section 12 of Hindu Marriage Act seeking annulment of marriage was filed by the husband Nitin Bansal on 06.04.2006. Complainant/Wife was blessed with a child during the period of separation, in October, 2006. The occurrence took place on 3.12.2006, when the respondent/wife alongwith her child tried to reenter the matrimonial home. 2.2.It is the case of respondent/wife that she was restrained by the petitioners from entering the shared household and, therefore, an offence punishable under section 341 read with 34 IPC was committed by the accused persons. 2.3.respondent/wife also filed a petition under Section 12 of the Domestic Violence Act and sought an order under Section 19 of the Act. Vide order dated 4.12.2006, learned MM granted an exparte order or residence and directed the present petitioners to permit the complainant to reside in the matrimonial house. This order was subsequently confirmed, against which a revision petition was filed before the court of Sessions. Shri Bharat Prashar, learned ASJ set aside the residence order, which order has been challenged by way of a petition under section 482 Cr.P.C. by the respondent/wife. An order of status quo has been passed by the Hon'ble High Court. 3.1.Shri Kaushal Kaushik, learned Counsel for the Petitioners has argued that the learned MM has not applied mind and framed charge with reference to an order passed under Section 19 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005; whereas the said order was passed on 4.12.2006 and the occurrence is alleged to have taken place prior to said order on i.e. 3.12.2006. It is further argued that respondent/wife had not right to enter the shared household, as the same was under the ownership of her father in law. Reliance has been placed upon law laid down in S.R. Batra Vs Smt. Taruna Batra 2007 [1] J.C.C. 73. It is argued that the respondent/wife who merely lived for a period of 1 ½ month with her husband has caused multifarious litigations and is acting with malafide intentions. It is also urged that husband Nitin Bansal had filed a petition for annulment of marriage, wherein she entered appearance and admitted that she was not living in the matrimonial home. She, therefore, had no right to re-enter the same. Thus the ingredients of Section 339 / 334 IPC are not established. 4.1.Ms. Sindhu Sakkarwal, learned Amicus Curiae for respondent/wife had argued the matter at length on 05.05.2009 and the matter was listed for orders on 13.5.2009. However, on 12.5.2009 respondent/wife filed written arguments through one Shri M.S. Deshwal, Advocate. A copy of written arguments were made available to the learned counsel for the Revisionist/Petitioner on 13.5.2009 and his arguments were heard afresh in response to the written arguments. 4.2.On behalf of the respondent/wife it is argued that the husband Nitin Bansal is still residing at the premises in question with his parents. He has mentioned this address in almost all communications. respondent/wife last resided in this house as her matrimonial home with her husband, the same is, therefore, a shared household. She was obstructed by the petitioners from entering the same and, therefore, an offence punishable under Section 341 read with 34 IPC is made out. It is submitted that at the stage of framing of charge, evidence is not to be weighed in golden scales. Disclosure of ingredients constituting the offence is sufficient for framing of charge. Reliance has been placed upon law laid down in Amit Kochhar & Anr. Vs State of Delhi 2007 I J.C.C. 709. It is further argued that the accused persons are precluded from relying upon any defence material. On this aspect reference has been made to law laid down in State of Orrissa Vs Devender Nath Padhi AIR 2005 SC 359. 4.3.In rebuttal Shri Kaushik has referred to law laid down in Rukmani Narvekar Vs Vijaya Satardekar reported as 2008 IV R.C.R. 924, and it urged that in an appropriate case the documents of defence can be looked into. 4.4.Shri R.K. Tanwar, learned APP has argued that framing of charge is justified, as reading of the complaint makes out the offence under section 341 IPC. 5.1.I have heard the learned Counsels and perused the documents on record and judgments relied upon by them. It is an unfortunate case where respondent/wife hardly lived in the matrimonial home for a period of 1 ½ month. She was dragged to the court within three months of marriage, when a petition for annulment of marriage filed. To further compound the bitterness complainant approached the criminal courts before the end of the year, in December 2006. Since then the parties are litigating at various forums. 5.2.For adjudicating upon the present dispute, reference shall have to made to Section 339 IPC, which defines wrongful restraint. For ready reference Section 339 IPC is reproduced herein below:- Wrongful restraint. 339. Whoever voluntarily obstructs any person so as to prevent that person from proceeding in any direction in which that person has a right to proceed, is said wrongfully to restrain that person. Exception: The obstruction of a private way over land or water which a person in good faith believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, is not an offence within the meaning of this section. 5.3.A perusal of the definition of wrongful restraint, reveals that the complainant must possess a right to proceed in the direction. Exception to the Section provides that a person who in good faith believes himself to have a lawful right to obstruct, does not commit the offence if he so obstructs. Meaning thereby if a person in good faith believes himself to possess a right to obstruct a person, no offence is committed. 6.1.In the backdrop of abovesaid discussion, I shall now dwell upon the facts of present case. Before proceeding further, I shall also make a reference to the law laid down in Rukmini Narvekar's case (Supra), which has created an exception to the law laid down in Devender Nath Padhi's case (Supra). In Rukmini's case it has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as under :- 18. "In our opinion, therefore, it cannot be said as an absolute proposition that under no circumstances can the Court look into the material produced by the defence at the time of framing of the charges, though this should be done in very rare cases i.e. where the defence produces some material which convincingly demonstrates that the whole prosecution case is totally absurd or totally concocted..........................................." 6.2.Thus in an appropriate case, where the complaint is preposterous, the documents can be considered. In the present case, as I shall discuss in succeeding paras, the occurrence has been stage managed and invited by the complainant herself. This, therefore, is one of those exceptional cases where the documents of defence can be looked into, especially because they are of unimpeachable authenticity. These are all proceedings of the courts, the copies thereof have not been disputed by the respondent/wife. I shall first refer to the order dated 4.12.2006 passed by Shri Devender Kumar Jangla, learned MM, in a Petition under Section 12 of the Prevention of Women from Domestic Violence Act, filed by respondent/wife. It was for the first time on 4.12.2006 that a Court had pronounced respondent's right to reside in the premises in question. Reference to this order at the stage of framing of charge, for an occurrence, which accused on 3.12.2006 i.e. prior to passing of this order is of course, totally uncalled for. The order framing charge and the charge dated 15.9.2008 are, therefore, irregular to this extent. This court shall not record any finding, whether the respondent/complainant had a right to reside in the said house or as to whether the house was a shared household. The matter is sub-judice before the Hon'ble High Court. Therefore, discussion on law laid down in S.R. Batra 's case (Supra) is avoided. 6.3.A perusal of the petition under Section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act filed by husband Nitin Bansal reveals that complainant had married him on 26.01.2006. She was admitted in a hospital on 10.3.2006 from where she left against medical advise and is staying with her parents since 14.3.2006. In the abovesaid proceedings respondent/wife filed a petition under Section 24 & 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act, wherein she admitted that she was not living in the matrimonial home since 14.3.2006. 6.4.I shall read the above mentioned pleadings only to the limited extent that respondent/wife was not living in the matrimonial home since 14.3.2006. She was aware of the Petition under Section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act, filed by the husband, wherein she had entered appearance and was contesting the same. She knew that she was no more welcome in the matrimonial home. In such circumstances, I am of the opinion that her visit to the matrimonial home on 3.12.2006 was an invitation to more disputes and litigations. She had not gone to the matrimonial home as a result of any conciliation proceedings or after any settlement between the parties. Her visit to assert her right and claim an entry was patently an invitation for trouble. In the alternative, this could also be a result of malafide intentions to create evidence for a criminal case. 6.5.I am of the opinion, that having abandoned the matrimonial home in March 2006, and having been engaged in matrimonial litigation with the husband her right to enter the matrimonial home had eclipsed. Further the petitioners, who had sought annulment of the marriage, were under the bonafide belief that they had a lawful right to obstruct the respondent from entering the matrimonial home, which she had already abandoned. The respondent/wife thus did not have the "right to proceed", as is necessary for an offence punishable under Section 341 IPC to be complete. Moreover, the petitioners are covered under the Exception of Section 339 IPC as they believed in good faith that they had a lawful right to obstruct her. 6.6.In similar circumstances the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rajender Singh Katoch Vs Chandigarh Administration reported as 2008[1] Cri.L.J. 356 held, that a co-sharer of the property was not entitled to get an FIR under Section 341 IPC registered and he should enforce his right through remedies available under the civil law. For ready reference the relevant portion of the judgment is produced herein below:- 8. ............................................................... ................................................................................. In this case, the authorities had made investigation into the matter. In fact, the Superintendent of Police himself has, pursuant to the directions issued by the High Court, investigated into the matter and visited the spot in order to find out the truth in the complaint of the petitioner from the neighbours. It was found that the complaint made by the appellant was false and the same had been been filed with an ulterior motive to take illegal possession of the first floor of the house. .............. ................................................................................. Ms. Madan contended that the right of the appellant to live in the joint family cannot be taken away. Right of a co-sharer to enjoy the joint family property is a civil right. Such a right, if denied by the other co-sharers for one reason or the other, must be enforced by taking recourse to the remedies available under the civil laws. Criminal proceedings, in our opinion, cannot be taken recourse to for enforcing such a civil right. ............................................................... ..............................................................................". 6.7.The facts in the present case are also similar, as the respondent/wife, who had already vacated the matrimonial home was yet to get her right enforced in a proper forum. In the cited case also a co-sharer who sought to enter the joint property and was restrained from the co- sharers had sought an FIR under Section 341 IPC to be registered, which was declined by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. 6.8.It can thus be concluded that respondent/wife did not possess any right to proceed inside the matrimonial home, on 3.12.2006, when she was obstructed. Secondly, petitioners were under bonafide belief that they had a lawful right to obsdtruct the respondent/wife from using the private path to their house. 7.1.For the aforesaid reasons, I am of the opinion that order framing charge and the charge framed on the basis thereof on 15.9.2008 by the learned MM is not justified. The same is, therefore, set aside. Accused persons/petitioners are discharged. Bail bonds are cancelled. Sureties are discharged. Trial Court Record be sent back to the trial court concerned alongwith a copy of order. Revision file be consigned to record room. Announced in the open Court (NAROTTAM KAUSHAL) today i.e. 16.05.2009. ASJ-II(NW):ROHINI:DELHI. CRIMINAL REVISION NO.302/2008. SH. SHIV KUAR BANSAL VS STATE (NCT OF DELHI) 16.05.2009. Present: Revisionist in person. Respondent in person. Vide separate order the present revision petition is allowed. Petitioners are discharged. Their bail bonds are cancelled. Their sureties are discharged. Trial Court record be sent back to the trial court concerned. Revision file be consigned to record room. (NAROTTAM KAUSHAL) ASJ-II(NW):ROHINI:DELHI. 16.05.2009.