State vs Surinder Singh on 29 May, 2024 IN THE COURT OF SH. ABHISHEK KUMAR ADDITIONAL CHIEF METROPOLITAN MAGISTRATE-01 PATIALA HOUSE COURTS, NEW DELHI DISTRICT: NEW DELHI Cr Cases 44949/2016 STATE Vs. Surinder Singh and Ors FIR No. 307 /2009 U/s 420/468/471/120-B IPC & 12 PP Act PS IGI Airport JUDGMENT 1. S. No. of the Case : 44949-2016 2. Date of commission of offence : On or before 24.07.2009 3. Name of the complainant : Sh. Yashwant Singh, Immigration, IGI Airport, T-3, New Delhi. 4. Name, parentage & address :(1) Surinder Singh (already convicted) (2) Inder Pal Singh @ I P Singh s/o late Shri Netra Singh r/o Flat No. 1/22, Second Floor, Block No. 1, Nehru Nagar, New Delhi. (3) Ram Babu Sharma, S/o late Sh. Bihari Lal Sharma, R/o 3139, Gali No. 228, Chandra Nagar, Tri Nagar, Delhi. State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.1 of 16 5. Offences charged for : Section 120-B, Section 420 r/w 120B r/w 468 IPC , Section 471 r/w 467 and 120B IPC and 12 PP Act . 6. Plea of Accused Persons : Pleaded not guilty 7. Order reserved on : 15.05.2024 8. The final order : Both the accused persons stand acquitted. 9. The date of judgment : 29.05.2024 BRIEF REASONS FOR THE DECISION OF THE CASE 1. The brief facts of the case are that on 24.07.2009 at about 10:40 AM, convict Surinder Singh approached the immigration clearance for Paris with passport bearing no. B5050867 and during scrutiny, it was observed that page no. 27 and 28 of the passport has been removed and another page bearing no. 7 & 8 has been affixed on the same, which also bears the Visa and page no. 29 of the passport has been chemically washed. State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.2 of 16 2. Thereafter, complaint was filed on behalf of the immigration and present FIR was registered. During the course of the investigation, convict Surinder disclosed the involvement of the accused Inder Pal Singh and Ram Babu Sharma in the commission of the crime. After the interrogation of all the accused persons and collection of the evidence, the charge-sheet was filed against them. 3. After filing of the charge-sheet, the cognizance of the offence was taken and accused persons were summoned. Upon the appearance of the accused persons, the charge-sheet along with the documents were supplied to the accused persons in compliance of Section 207 CrPC. 4. During the course of the trial, accused Surinder Singh was convicted through the process of plea bargaining. Thereafter, charge under Section 120-B, Section 420 r/w 120B r/w 468 IPC , Section 471 r/w 467 and 120B IPC and 12 PP Act 1967 was framed against both the accused to which the accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. During the prosecution evidence, prosecution had examined ten witnesses. 5. After the closure of the prosecution evidence, the statement of the accused persons under Section 313 Cr.P.C was recorded. Despite opportunity, the accused persons did not lead any defence evidence. Accordingly, the final arguments were heard on behalf of the state as well as on behalf of the accused persons and the matter was reserved for orders. Before proceeding further to give findings, it will be pertinent to State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.3 of 16 discuss the relevant provisions of law involved in the present case and also analyze the facts in the light of evidence led by the prosecution. 6. For easy reference and understanding, the provisions of law involved in the present case have been broadly classified into four categories i.e Criminal Conspiracy, Cheating, Forgery and Passport Act. Let us discuss these categories one by one hereinafter. CRIMINAL CONSPIRACY 7. The criminal conspiracy is a punishable offence under Section 120 B IPC, which is defined under Section 120A IPC. In case titled as Rajendra alias Rajesh alias Raju v. State of NCT of Delhi (2019) 10 SCC 623, the hon'ble Apex Court has observed that it is trite law that the existence of three elements must be shown--a criminal object, a plan or a scheme embodying means to accomplish that object, and an agreement or understanding between two or more people to cooperate for the accomplishment of such object's. 8. Further in the case of Yogesh v. State of Maharashtra [(2008) 10 SCC 394], the honble Supreme Court of India in reference to criminal conspiracy has observed as follows: "...25. Thus, it is manifest that the meeting of minds of two or more persons for doing an illegal act or an act by illegal means is sine qua non of the criminal conspiracy but it may not be possible to prove the agreement between them by direct proof. Nevertheless, existence of the conspiracy and its objective can be inferred from the surrounding circumstances and the conduct of the accused. But the incriminating circumstances must form a chain of events from which a conclusion about the State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.4 of 16 guilt of the accused could be drawn. It is well settled that an offence of conspiracy is a substantive offence and renders the mere agreement to commit an offence punishable, even if an offence does not take place pursuant to the illegal agreement..." 9. To summarize, criminal conspiracy is an independent offence, which is punishable separately and can be proved either by way of direct proof or circumstantial evidence, only if essential ingredients as mentioned under Section 120A IPC are fulfilled. CHEATING 10. The offence pertaining to cheating is covered under Chapter 17 of the IPC under the heading 'of offences against property' and is covered from Section 415 to 420 IPC. Section 415 IPC defines the term cheating whereas Section 416 i.e 'cheating by personation' and Section 420 i.e 'cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property' are an aggravated form of cheating, which provides for enhanced punishment. 11. In the offence of cheating, a person deceives another person fraudulently or dishonestly to deliver any property or consent to the retention of any property or intentionally induces another person to do or omit to do anything which he would not have done if he was not so deceived and such act has caused or is likely to cause damage, or harm in body, mind, reputation or property. State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.5 of 16 12. In the case of Iridium India Tel oftenecom Ltd. v. Motorola Inc. , (2011) 1 SCC 74 , the Honble Supreme Court of India while refering to Section 415 IPC has observed as follows: "...68. A bare perusal of the aforesaid section would show that it can be conveniently divided into two parts. The first part makes it necessary that the deception by the accused of the person deceived, must be fraudulent or dishonest. Such deception must induce the person deceived to either: (a) deliver property to any person; or (b) consent that any person shall retain any property. The second part also requires that the accused must by deception intentionally induce the person deceived either to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit, if he was not so deceived. Furthermore, such act or omission must cause or must be likely to cause damage or harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property. Thus, it is evident that deception is a necessary ingredient for the offences of cheating under both parts of this section..." 13. Section 416 IPC defines cheating by personation, which is a punishable offence under Section 419 IPC. It is an aggravated form of cheating which consists of personating another by pretending to be some other person or knowingly substituting one person for another or representing to the any other person other than the said person really is. It is to be borne in mind that personation by itself is no offence but when a person fraudulently and dishonestly does a fraudulent act and represents himself as another person, Section 416 IPC will be attracted. FORGERY 14. Section 463 to 477A of the IPC deals with the offences relating to forgery, forged documents and making or possessing counterfeit seal etc. with the intent to commit forgery and is covered under Chapter 18 of the Code which pertains to 'of offences relating to documents and property Marks'. Section 463 defines the term forgery which is punishable under Section State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.6 of 16 465 IPC . The offence of forgery is completed when a false document is prepared so that the same can be used as genuine. The making of false document is defined under Section 464 IPC. 15. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled as Ram Narayan Popli v. CBI , (2003) 3 SCC 641 while referring to section 463 IPC has observed as follows: "...371. In of order to constitute forgery, the first essential is that the accused should have made a false document. The false document must be made with an intent to cause damage or injury to the public or to any class of public or to any community. 372.The expression "intent to defraud" implies conduct coupled with an intention to deceive or thereby to cause injury. In other words, defraud involves two conceptions, namely, the deceit and injury to the person deceived, that is infringement of some legal right possessed by him but not necessarily deprivation of property. The term "forgery" as used in the statute is used in its ordinary and popular acceptation. 373. The definition of the offence of forgery declares the offence to be completed when a false document or false part of a document is made with specified intention. The questions are (i) is the document false, (ii) is it made by the accused, and (iii) is it made with an intent to defraud. If at all the questions are answered in the affirmative, the accused is guilty. 374. In order to constitute an offence of forgery the documents must be made dishonestly or fraudulently. But dishonest or fraudulent are not tautological. Fraudulent does not imply the deprivation of property or an element of injury. In order to be fraudulent, there must be some advantage on the one side with a corresponding loss on the other. Every forgery postulates a false document either in whole or in part, however small. 375. The intent to commit forgery involves an intent to cause injury. A person makes a false document who dishonestly or fraudulently signs with an intent or cause to believe that the document was signed by a person whom he knows it was not signed..." 16. With respect to the creation of a false document in reference to Section 464 IPC, the Hon'ble Apex Court in case titled as Mohd. Ibrahim v. State of Bihar , (2009) 8 SCC 751 observed as follows: State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.7 of 16 "...14. An analysis of Section 464 of the Penal Code shows that it divides false documents into three categories: 1. The first is where a person dishonestly or fraudulently makes or executes a document with the intention of causing it to be believed that such document was made or executed by some other person, or by the authority of some other person, by whom or by whose authority he knows it was not made or executed. 2. The second is where a person dishonestly or fraudulently, by cancellation or otherwise, alters a document in any material part, without lawful authority, after it has been made or executed by either himself or any other person. 3. The third is where a person dishonestly or fraudulently causes any person to sign, execute or alter a document knowing that such person could not by reason of (a) unsoundness of mind; or (b) intoxication; or (c) deception practised upon him, know the contents of the document or the nature of the alteration. In short, a person is said to have made a "false document", if (i) he made or executed a document claiming to be someone else or authorised by someone else; or (ii) he altered or tampered a document; or (iii) he obtained a document by practising deception, or from a person not in control of his senses. 17. Section 467 (forgery of valuable security, will etc.), Section 468 (forgery for purpose of cheating) and Section 471 (using as genuine a forged document or electronically record) are the aggravated form of the offence of forgery and the condition precedent for these offences is the existence of forgery and the creation of false document or electronic record. Section 470 IPC defines a forged document which is a false document made wholly or in part by forgery. 18. For the purposes of convicting an accused under Section 471 IPC, it has to be shown that the accused knew or had reason to believe that the document was forged. PASSPORT ACT State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.8 of 16 19. Section 3 of the Passport Act provides that no person shall depart from, or attempt to depart from, India unless he holds in this behalf a valid passport or travel document. 20. Section 12 of the Act provides for offences and penalties. The provision for ready reference is as follows: 12. Offences and penalties.-- (1)Whoever-- (a)contravenes the provisions of section 3 ; or (b)knowingly furnishes any false information or suppresses any material information with a view to obtaining a passport or travel document under this Act or without lawful authority alters or attempts to alter or causes to alter the entries made in a passport or travel document;or (c)fails to produce for inspection his passport or travel document (whether issued under this Act or not) when called upon to do so by the prescribed authority; or (d)knowingly uses a passport or travel document issued to another person; or (e)knowingly allows another person to use a passport or travel document issued to him;shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with both. (1A)Whoever, not being a citizen of India,-- (a)makes an application for a passport or obtains a passport by suppressing information about his nationality, or (b)holds a forged passport or any travel document,shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to five years and with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. (2)Whoever abets any offence punishable under sub­section (1) or sub­section (1A) shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, be punishable with the punishment provided in that sub­section for that offence. (3)Whoever contravenes any condition of a passport or travel document or any provision of this Act or any rule made thereunder for which no punishment is provided elsewhere in this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both. (4)Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under this Act, is again convicted of an offence under this Act shall be State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.9 of 16 punishable with double the penalty provided for the latter Object 1 offence. 21. After understanding the relevant provisions of law involving the present case, let us analyse the facts in the light of the prosecution evidence hereinafter which stands proved or not proved by taking into account the evidence which has been brought on record by the prosecution. ANALYSIS OF THE PROSECUTION EVIDENCE 22. In the instant case, the prosecution through the testimony of PW-3 Yashwant Singh, who was posted at Departure Wing at Counter No. 30 has proved the fact that the convict Surinder Singh approached his counter for immigration clearance and he has observed the removal of the pages and some new pages being affixed at the passport and one page being chemically washed. This observation of the witness stands corroborated through the report of the Deputy Works Manager, India Security Press, which is Ex.P3. The accused has not disputed this fact by way of cross-examination or by bringing on record any cogent evidence. Thus, the prosecution has been able to prove that there was tampering on the passport in question as alleged in the charge-sheet. Further, the report of the India Security Press is not disputed by the accused persons as it was admitted by them on 21.12.2019. It is amply clear that original page no. 27/28 of the passport has been removed and replaced with genuine page no. 7/8 from another passport and the area of the original page number 7/8 has been damaged and the laser numbering of page State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.10 of 16 no. 27/28 has been created through the numbering wholes of page no. 29/30. 23. Further, the prosecution has been able to prove that the present FIR was registered as the same is not disputed by the accused persons with respect to its genuineness. Further, PW-4 corroborates the registration of the FIR as he has stated before the court that the complaint along with the pax and travel documents were handed over to the Duty Officer by him and the said Duty Officer seized all the documents vide seizure memo Ex.PW4/A. 24. Furthermore, the arrest of the convict Surinder Singh stands proved qua the testimony of PW-10 Retd Inspector Ram Mehar Singh, who has deposed that the accused was arrested by him on the receipt of the FIR as well as the travel documents and the accused in the presence of HC Anand Swaroop, who has been examined as PW-6. It has been stated that the accused was arrested through Arrest Memo Ex.PW10/A and his Disclosure Statement was recorded vide memo Ex.PW6/A. This fact is not disputed by the present accused persons. 25. The accused persons have also not disputed their arrest and the proceedings conducted by the Investigating Officer. The main argument of the accused persons is that they were never the part of any criminal conspiracy as alleged against them and there is no evidence on record to prove the same. In order to establish the charge of criminal conspiracy against both the accused, the prosecution has examined PW-1 Kamal Singh, PW-2 Jang State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.11 of 16 Bahadur Singh and PW-5 Vijay Kumar. These witnesses have not supported the case of the prosecution. 26. PW-1 Kamal Singh happens to be the brother of convict Surinder Singh and has stated that the passport was handed over to the accused Inder Pal Singh by his brother for arranging Visa. However, this statement is hearsay as the witness categorically stated that this fact was told to him by his brother and he was not present there. Then, his brother has showed him photocopy of the pages of the passport having Visa affixed on it and he met Ashwani Kumar, Sanjeev and Raja through his brother. Then, his elder brother Jang Bahadur Singh and Vijay Kumar, who were also present at the time of meeting handed over amount to the said persons and collected the passport along with the ticket of his brother. He also stated that the accused Ashwani Kumar was apprehended by the police official of PS Chankaya Puri but nothing was done by the IO despite identification by his brother. 27. During the cross-examination of the witness by the State as he was not disclosing the complete facts, the witness stated that accused Ram Babu Sharma was introduced to his brother by Inder Pal. He admitted the suggestion that an amount of Rs.2.5 lakhs were given to Ashwani, Sanjeev and Raja. The accused persons did not cross-examine the witness despite opportunity. 28. Thereafter, PW-2 Jang Bahadur has deposed that he has given the payment to Ashwani Kumar which was about Rs.4-4.5 lakhs. The witness was also cross-examined by the State on being hostile. During cross-examination, he denied the suggestion that State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.12 of 16 accused Inder Pal Singh and Ram Bahadur Sharma along with other associates procured passport to his brother Surinder or that they had settled for Rs.5.5 lakhs for the issuance of Visa to Germany. He denied the suggestion that accused Inder Pal conspired to obtain the forged Visa. 29. Thereafter, PW-5 Vijay Kumar deposed that his brothers have given Rs.2.5 lakhs to convict Surinder. During the cross- examination, witness stated that money was given to agent Sanjeev, Ashwani and Raja and they were responsible for the fraud and forgery in the passport of his brother. 30. During investigation, both the accused persons were arrested but as per the testimony of PW-10, PW-8 and PW-9, nothing was recovered from the possession of the accused persons. Therefore, in order to prove the allegations of criminal conspiracy, the prosecution has heavily relied upon the statement of the brothers of the convict Surinder Singh but these witnesses have not supported the case of the prosecution. However, it is a trite law that even if a witness turn hostile, his statement can be looked into and can be used for the purposes of corroboration of the other material evidence. Therefore, it has to be analyzed that even if the testimony of these witnesses to the effect where they have not supported the case of the prosecution is discarded, is there any material on record which can establish the criminal conspiracy between the accused persons. The answer is no as there is no direct evidence to the said effect. There is nothing on record to establish the fact that both the accused actually received the payment or that they have conspired to commit the crime as State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.13 of 16 none of the prosecution witnesses were able to state the date and place where the agreement to commit the present illegal act was entered between the accused persons. Therefore, the evidence is not sufficient to substantiate the allegations of criminal conspiracy. On the other hand, the prosecution witnesses namely PW-1, PW-2 and PW-5 have mentioned the name of other persons involved in the commission of crime without incriminating the present accused persons. 31. It is also pertinent to observe that as per the Disclosure statement of the convict Surinder Singh, he has taken the name of Ashwani, Raja and Sanjeev and did not implicate the present accused persons. It is true that the criminal conspiracies are hatched in secrecy and the direct evidence to prove the same is seldom available. Thus, it becomes important that in order to prove the criminal conspiracy through circumstantial evidence, the chain of the events establishing the conspiracy shall be proved unhindered and there shall be no break in the chain. However, the circumstantial evidence available on record is based on the disclosure statements and there is no discovery of any evidence on the said basis. It is a settled proposition of law that the disclosure statement of the accused is inadmissible in the eyes of law and further, statement of one accused cannot be used against the another accused and the allegations have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of the collection of evidence and the disclosure statement of the accused persons cannot be deemed to be evidence and thus cannot be relied upon. State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.14 of 16 32. Therefore, I am of the opinion that the prosecution has failed to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the accused persons had entered into an agreement with the convict Surinder Singh for arranging the Visa by tampering with the passport. Further, the accused persons have been charged for the other offences on the basis of criminal conspiracy and if the charge of criminal conspiracy remains unproved, the accused persons cannot be held liable for the remaining substantive offences. Also, there is no evidence to establish that both the accused had tampered with the passport. 33. It is an established principle of criminal jurisprudence that a case has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt and suspicion, how grave it may be cannot substitute the burden of proof imposed upon the prosecution. FINDINGS 34. On the basis of the analysis of the prosecution evidence, I am of the opinion that the prosecution has failed to prove the charge of criminal conspiracy against the accused persons and thus, they are acquitted for the offence U/s 120-B IPC . Since, the accused persons have been charged with the offence u/s 420 , 468 , 471 , 467 IPC and 12 PP Act on the basis of the charge u/s 120B IPC, they deserve to be acquitted for the above mentioned offences also on account of the failure of the prosecution to establish the essential ingredients as per section 120A IPC dealing with criminal conspiracy. State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.15 of 16 CONCLUSION. 35. In the backdrop of above discussion, it is held that prosecution has not been able to establish all the essential ingredients of the offences as alleged against the accused persons. Accordingly the accused persons namely Inder Pal Singh @ I P Singh and Ram Babu Sharma stands acquitted for the offences U/s 120-B, Section 420 r/w 120B r/w 468 IPC , Section 471 r/w 467 and 120B IPC and 12 PP Act 1967. 36. Accused persons are directed to furnish personal bonds in the sum of Rs.10,000/- each. 37. Ordered Accordingly. Announced in the open Court on 29st May, 2024. This judgment contains sixteen pages and each page is signed by me. Digitally signed by ABHISHEK ABHISHEK KUMAR KUMAR Date: 2024.05.29 11:30:24 +0530 ( Abhishek Kumar ) ACMM-01/PHC/New Delhi State Vs Surinder Singh and Ors. FIR No. 307 /2009 Page No.16 of 16