B.K. Bajpai vs Nafis Ahmed on 25 April, 2017 In the Court of Dr. Rakesh Kumar: Additional District Judge (South District) Saket Courts Complex, New Delhi. CS No.: 6625/16 CNR No. : DLST01-000745-2014 In the matter of :- B.K. Bajpai, Manager New Ankur Public School 683/3, I-Block, Sangam Vihar, New Delhi- 110062 .......Plaintif Versus Nafis Ahmed S/o Islam Khan R/o 168/4, Block 1 & 2 Sangam Vihar, New Delhi- 110062 ...... Defendant Date of institution : 30.08.2014 Reserved for order : 11.04.2017 Date of decision : 25.04.2017 Appearance: Sh. V.P. Singh, Counsel for the plaintiff. Sh. Sheikh Imran Alam, Counsel for the defendant JUDGMENT 1. This is a suit for recovery of Rs.20,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty Lacs Only) filed by the plaintiff on account of damages/ compensation for the defamation resulting in mental agony, physical pain and harassment caused to the plaintiff by the defendant. 2. Facts as alleged in the plaint are that the plaintiff is running a school in the name and style of New Ankur Public School, 683/3, I-Block, Sangam Vihar, New Delhi - 110062. The son of the CS/6625/16 Page 1 of 17 defendant was student of class 3rd in the school of the plaintiff and on 02.08.2005, during interval period, the son of the defendant namely Imran and other student namely Alok quarreled with each other in which son of the defendant sustained injuries in his eyes upon which the defendant made a false complaint on the next date dated 03.08.2005 that no medical facilities was provided to his son. The defendant also blamed that there was negligence on the part of the school and also lodged complaint with number of authorities. The false complaint dated 26.08.2005 to SHO PS Sangam Vihar, New Delhi against the plaintiff and further complaint dated 10.10.2005 to Council of Child Welfare Quadsia Bagh, Yamuna Marg, Civil Line, Delhi - 110054 and copy to Chief Minister of Delhi, Chief Person National Human Rights Commission, Chairman Public Grievances Commission, Directorate of Education, Commissioner of Police, Aaj Tak, Star News, BBC, NDTV, The Times of India, Hindustan Times and complaint dated 29.10.2005 to National Human Rights Commission, New Delhi were filed by the defendant with sole malafide intention to harass the plaintiff and the Principal of the school and further to blackmail and extort money from them. All the authorities started investigation in the matter and used to call the plaintiff and Principal of the school time and again and unnecessarily interrogated them. Due to aforesaid investigation on the false complaints of the defendant, the plaintiff and the Principal of the school suffered great harassment, humiliation, mental agony, torture and monetary loss. These Authorities did not take any action against the plaintiff and the Principal of the school. The defendant also filed a false, frivolous and malicious civil suit no. 128/2008 titled as "Nafis Ahmed v. New Ankur Public School & Anr" for compensation, recovery of CS/6625/16 Page 2 of 17 Rs.15,00,000/- against the school and Principal of school with the wrong allegation. The said suit was dismissed on 10.10.2013. On account of aforesaid complaints, the plaintiff suffered financial losses as well as mental shock, tension, agony and loss of reputation of school in the eyes of parents of the kids in the locality and therefore, the defendant is liable to pay Rs.20,00,000/- towards compensation/damages. The plaintiff sent a legal notice dated 11.04.2014 but instead of complying with the notice, the defendant sent a false and frivolous reply dated 28.04.2014. Hence, the present suit. 3. The defendant contested this suit by filing written statement and in his defence stated that the defendant through the complaints has brought the facts regarding injuries caused to eyes of his son in the school during teaching time and sought redressal of his problems from various authorities and the forums. No loss has been caused to the plaintiff, rather the plaintiff is harrasing the defendant by filing the present suit. The defendant has preferred an appeal against the judgment dated 10.10.2013 passed in Civil Suit no. 128/08 through Delhi High Court Legal Service Committee and the same is under process. It is further submitted that defendant is still pursing his criminal complaints pending in District Courts, Delhi. It is further submitted that there was negligence on the part of the plaintiff and no medical aid was provided to the victim for the treatment. There was no medical facility available at school despite the fact that high amount of fees were charged by the school and the son of defendant has suffered permanent disability which stands corroborated by disability certificate. Other allegations made in the plaint are denied and CS/6625/16 Page 3 of 17 disputed by the defendants and prayed for dismissal of suit. 4. The plaintiff filed replication to the written statement wherein the contentions of the written statement were traversed and the averments of the plaint were reaffirmed. 5. From the pleadings of parties, the following issues were framed on 03.12.2014 by the learned Predecessor, namely:- 1.Whether the defendant has committed wrong of defamation against the plaintiff? OPP 2.Whether the defendant is liable to pay damages to the plaintiff for the wrong to defamation committed against the plaintiff?OPP 3.Whether the suit is barred by limitation? OPD 4.Whether no cause of action has arisen in favour of the plaintiff?OPD 5.Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any relief. 6. The plaintiff examined himself as PW1 and tendered his evidence by way of affidavit (Ex. PW1/A) and also produced the document Ex. P.1 to Ex. P.27. 7. The defendant examined himself as DW1 and also examined his son, who had sustained injuries in the incident in question, as DW2. 8. I have heard arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties and perused the material available on record. CS/6625/16 Page 4 of 17 9. My issue-wise findings are as follows:- ISSUE NO.1 and 2 Whether the defendant has committed wrong of defamation against the plaintiff? OPP Whether the defendant is liable to pay damages to the plaintiff for the wrong to defamation committed against the plaintiff?OPP Onus qua these issues was placed on the plaintiff. These issues are taken up together being interconnected. 10. In order to prove its case, Sh. B.K. Bajpai, Manager New Ankur Public School, stepped in witness box as PW1 and tendered evidence by way of affidavit as PW1/A. He made statement in accordance with the averments made in the plaint and placed on record Authorization letters as Ex. P.1 and Ex. P.2 and deposed that he was authorized by New Ankur Shikha Samiti (Regd.) vide Authorization letters dated 20.03.2014 to sign, verify and file the present suit and to lead evidence etc. He produced Election ID card and Aadhar Card as Ex. P.4 and Ex. P.5 respectively alongwith copy of Recognition of school as Ex. P.6 and copy of Memorandum of Society as Ex. P.7. He categorically deposed that a Civil Suit for recovery of Rs.15,00,000/- titled "Nafis Ahmad v. New Ankur Public School and anr" was instituted against the school and the Principal which was dismissed on 10.10.2013. He placed on record certified copy of judgment and decree as Ex. P.8. He further stated that on account of various complaints made by the defendant, the plaintiff has not only suffered mental shock and agony but also the reputation and the goodwill of the school and the plaintiff in the eyes of public at large had been damaged. The plaintiff further CS/6625/16 Page 5 of 17 placed on record copy of legal notice Ex. P.10, postal receipts a well as courier receipt as Ex. P.11 and Ex. P.12 respectively and copy of reply sent by the defendant through his counsel as Ex. P.13. This witness also placed on record certified copies of statement and cross-examination of Ct. Anil Kumar dated 10.05.2012 as Ex. P.14, certified copy of order of Assistant Commissioner of Police (Head Quarter) as Ex. P.15, Certified copy of statement of Rohit Rawat on 20.02.2013 alongwith certified copy of complaint under section 200 Cr.PC and application under Section 156 Cr.PC as Ex.P-16 (colly), Certified copy of complaint filed by defendant as Ex.P-17, Certified copy of legal notice dated 19.10.2006 issued by the defendant as Ex.P-18, Certified copy of status report dated 27.08.2007 alongwith statements of Smt. Rajni Bajpai and Brijesh Kumar Bajpai as Ex.P-19 (colly), Certified copy of reply as Ex.P-20, Certified copy of evidence affidavit of Brijesh Kumar alongwith cross-examination running into seven pages as Ex.P-21 (colly), Certified copy of evidence affidavit of Smt. Rajni alongwith cross- examination running into seven pages as Ex.P-22 (colly), Certified copy of letter dated 09.07.2008 as Ex. P-23, Certified copy of letter sent by New Ankur Public School to DEO MCD, Lajpat Nagar as Ex.P-24, Certified copy of complaint dated 10.10.2005 to different authorities and replies sent by the authorities running into 12 pages as Ex.P-25 (colly), Certified copy of statement of Nafis Ahmad running into five pages as Ex.P-26 (colly) and Certified copy of order dated 28.02.2008 as Ex.P-27. 11. This witness was subjected to cross-examination by the defendant and in the opening lines of cross-examination, it is admitted that the aims and the objectives of the society "New CS/6625/16 Page 6 of 17 Ankur Shiksha Samiti" is charitable. It is also admitted that plaintiff is not doing business or earning profit from the activity of the said society. It is also stated that society started New Ankur Public School with strength of 200 students and there are about 400 students enrolled/ studying in the school in the current session. This witness has expressed his inability to tell the number of students enrolled/ studying in the academic session 2005-06. This witness further stated in cross-examination that Mohd. Imran remained as a student for three years. He denied that on 04.08.2005, Mohd. Imran attended the school and he was beaten by any teacher. He denied the suggestion that Imran was not allowed to leave the school by the Principal upto 05:00 p.m. To the question that when Mohd. Imran was attending his classes of teacher, Ms. Salma, he was also beaten by another student namely Alok and he used a pencil to cause injuries in the eye of Imran, this witness responded it is correct. Further to the question that school has not provided medical aid to Mohd. Imran child for his injuries in his eye, in reply, he stated that child did not tell us about any injury. Further to the question that there was no further complaint against the management of the school after the year 2005 and there is no any other complaint, if any, on the record, this witness responded that there is a complaint to the different authorities on 26.08.2005, 29.08.2005 and 10.10.2005. He further stated that he does not know if the complaint Ex. P.17 was published in any newspaper or not or it was circulated in the public. He further admitted that the complaint Ex. P.17 was not telecasted or broadcasted in any television or radio. He also stated that he has not filed any statement of accounts or balance sheets for the financial year 2005-06, 2006-07 and subsequent years. CS/6625/16 Page 7 of 17 12. Learned counsel for the plaintiff argued that New Ankur Public School is a reputed school in its vicinity / locality/ area and on account of false complaints lodged to the various authorities by the defendant, the school as well as its authorities suffered great harassment/ humiliation, mental agony, torture and monetary loss. 13. On the other hand, learned counsel for defendant contended that no false complaint was lodged against the plaintiff. The defendant through various complaints has brought the facts regarding the injuries caused to the eyes of his son during the teaching time and has sought redressal of his problem from these said authorities on the forums and referred to the evidence adduced by the defendant in his defence. 14. In defence, the defendant stepped in witness box as DW1 and made statement in consonance with the avernments made in the written statement and tendered evidence by way of affidavit as Ex. DW1/A. In his cross-examination, he has admitted that he has filed Suit no. 128/2008 against the plaintiff which was dismissed, however, voluntary stated that an appeal is pending. He also stated that he has made several complaints to different authorities including police authorities, National Human Rights Commission, Public Grievance Commission, newspaper, courts etc. but categorically denied the suggestion that he had made those complaints to damage the reputation and goodwill of the school of the plaintiff. He also denied the suggestion that he had made those complaints to extort money from the plaintiff. He also denied the suggestion that he had demonstrated outside the premises of school and uttered abusive language. The defendant also CS/6625/16 Page 8 of 17 examined Imran Ahmad, his son, who had sustained injuries in the incident which took place on 04.08.2005 during lunch break between 10:30 -11:30 a.m. as DW2. This witness tendered evidence by way of affidavit as Ex. DW2/A and made statement that on the date of incident, his classmate namely Alok hit him in his right eye with pencil resultantly causing injury. He went to his class-teacher Ms. Salma and informed about the incident and severe pain. She shouted upon him and asked to sit, thereafter, he went to Principal of the school and informed her. He was scolded by the Principal and was told to sit in the classroom. He also stated that no first aid was provided and he was not allowed to leave the school. He also stated that he was taken to hospital by his father where he was treated and operated. He further stated that since first aid was not provided by the teacher, Principal and management, he has suffered 30% disability. He also stated that RFA no. 260/15 is pending before Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. He further stated that Crm. M.C no. 1386/2016 is also pending before Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. This witness further stated that he was a student of class 3 at the relevant time and sustained injury in his right eye resulting into permanent damage to his visibility. This witness was cross-examined and during cross-examination he denied that he got injured on 02.08.2005 in the lunch time and submitted that he got injured on 04.08.2005. He also stated that there was no scuffle between him and Alok. Alok hit in his eye with a pencil. He further denied the suggestion that the Principal of school called Alok's mother on 03.08.2005 and the matter was settled. He stated that it is incorrect that his father got pasted posters on the walls of the school that his son was injured due to the negligence of the school. He stated that it is incorrect that CS/6625/16 Page 9 of 17 incident was telecasted in television or published in newspaper. He also denied the suggestion that his family members protested in front of school and the school was defamed due to protest by his parents and stated that there was no such protest. 15. Learned counsel for the defendant argued that Imran had been studying in the school of the plaintiff on the date of the incident. No proper care was taken by the school authorities and furthermore no medical first aid was provided to Imran which not only caused grievous injury but has also caused permanent damage to the eye of Imran. The complaints lodged by the defendant to various authorities were to seek redressal of the grievance and not to cause damage to the reputation and goodwill of the school of the plaintiff. 16. After hearing rival contentions made by learned counsel for the respective parties and evidence adduced on record, it transpires that in the present suit, the plaintiff is seeking recovery of damages on account of wrong of the defamation committed by the defendant. 17. Before adverting to the rival contentions, it is relevant to understand the meaning of defamation. As per Ramanatha Iyer's Law Lexicon, II Edition, 2007 'Defamation' is a false publication, calculated to bring one in disrepute; an intentional false communication, either published or publicly spoken, that injures another's reputation, scorn or contempt in a respectable and considerable part of the community, which may be criminal as well as civil, which includes both libel and slander. CS/6625/16 Page 10 of 17 18. In Black's Law Dictionary, referring McGowen v. Prentice, La. App. 341 S. 23 , 55 , 57 , it has been defined that 'Defamation' is that which tends to injure reputation; to diminish the esteem, respect, goodwill or confidence in which the plaintiff has held, or to excite adverse, derogatory or unpleasant feelings or opinions against him and statement, which exposes person to contempt, hatred, ridicule or obloquy. 19. As per Purshottam v. Prem Shanker , reported in AIR 1966 ALL 377, 'Defamation' in law includes Criminal and Civil, in considering its scope, as per Articles 19 (2) and 21 of the Constitution. 20. Section 499 of the Indian Penal Code ( IPC ) gives the definition for defamation, which reads as follows: "Whoever, by words wither spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person." 21. As per Section 499 IPC, whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, knowingly or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm the reputation of the other person, that would come under the purview of defamation and exceptions are also stipulated therein. As per first exception to Section 499 IPC, CS/6625/16 Page 11 of 17 imputation of truth or statement made or published for public good cannot be construed as defamation. It is not in dispute that Section 500 IPC deals with punishment for committing an offence of defamation. 22. Further, the wrong of defamation may be committed either by way of writing, or its equivalent, or by way of speech. The term 'libel' is used for the former kind of utterances, 'slander' for the latter. Libel is a written, and slander is a spoken, defamation. A libel is a publication of a false and defamatory statement tending to injure the reputation of another person without lawful justification or excuse. The statement must be expressed in some permanent form, e.g. Writing, printing, pictures, statute, waxwork effigy, etc. 23. It is undisputed preposition of law that for any act of defamation, two types of remedies are available one is civil and other is criminal, however, in so far as criminal remedy is concerned, the defamation can be either libel or slander or both. To constitute a libel the following essential elements must be proved by the plaintiff:- 1. There must be a statement in writing; 2. The statement was published; 3. The statement was defamatory and caused you injury; 4. The statement was false; and 5. The statement did not fall into a privileged category 24. In the present case, it is alleged by the plaintiff that the defendant engaged himself into defamation of plaintiff by filing several complaints including civil as well as criminal complaints of CS/6625/16 Page 12 of 17 alleged incident on number of forums interalia including police authorities, National Human Rights Commission, Public Grievance Commission, newspaper, courts etc. Per contra, the defendant claimed that he was pursuing lawful remedies for the wrong committed to his son while he was in care of school. It is also contended that outcome of these remedies is yet to be finalized because some of the cases are at appeal stage. As discussed in preceeding paragraphs, the essentials of both libel and slander essentially remains the same, the difference is only the mode of publication of defamatory contents. In libel, it was done through written medium while in slander it is through spoken format. 25. The controversy in the present suit germinated out of an incident which as per the defendant occurred on 04.08.2005 when allegedly the son of defendant suffered eye injury which was not said to have been properly dealt by the school authorities. The defendant nurtured a grievance against the school which can be succinctly described eminiting from maxim In Loco Parentis (a Latin term meaning "In place of the parent"). It is a legal doctrine which is applicable to the school administration and teachers and this doctrine means that when the child is at school or away on a school sponsored extra curricular activity, the school has the responsibility and the duties as of student's parents and any latitude in supervising the activities, it will open the door for taking administration/ authorities liable for accidents and injuries sustained by the student under school supervision. It cannot be lost sight that while accidents in school are inevitable but the law requires that the school administration and the teachers should do everything reasonably possible to minimize any accident or injury. CS/6625/16 Page 13 of 17 It is a plea of the defendant that his son Imran has suffered major injury and has become permanently disabled. It is not a case where the defendant made statements without any basis only with an intention to defame the plaintiff. The defendant/ DW1 has withstood the cross-examination and during cross-examination categorically denied the suggestions that complaints made to the different authorities were to damage reputation and goodwill of the school of the plaintiff. Further, DW2 in his cross-examination has categorically stated that the incident has occurred on 04.08.2005. Further, Alok was his classmate and Alok hit in his eye with a pencil. It is evident from the above that in the prospective of the defendant, he was alleging certain truthful facts as per his own belief which he has raised on all possible platforms. These kind of actions, even if, has caused some kind of discomfiture or embarrassment due to submitting grievances before number of authorities by themselves do not constitute defamation because the defendant has based these issues on truthful beliefs exercising his due diligence in the capacity of being father. 26. Beside this, it is also evident from the evidence adduced by the plaintiff, which constitute self serving statement of PW1, it does not disclose or attribute any defamatory intent to the defendant. No independent witness has been examined by the plaintiff to exhibit that there was any disrepute caused to the plaintiff. There is no documentary evidence submitted which could show that the reputation of the school was damaged in public eye to an extent which requires compensation in monetary format. No statement of account has been submitted by the plaintiff to show that there was decline intake of students in the school resultantly causing CS/6625/16 Page 14 of 17 monetary loss. The plaintiff in his cross-examination himself admitted that he has not filed any statement of accounts or balance sheet for the financial year 2005-06, 2006-07 and subsequent years. He also stated in cross-examination that he does not know if the complaint Ex. P.17 was published in any newspaper or not or it was circulated in public. The documentary evidence submitted by the plaintiff are mere complaints, certified copies of statements etc. which are not themselves to come to a conclusion that any disrepute of the claimed magnitude has been caused in the public eye. The plaintiff has failed to establish its case that defendant had committed wrong of defamation and since plaintiff could not substantiate its claim, therefore, the plaintiff is not entitled to any damage, accordingly both these issues are decided against the plaintiff. Issue no. 3. Whether the suit is barred by limitation. The onus to prove this issue was upon the defendant. 27. Learned counsel for defendant argued that the suit is barred by law of Limitation. The alleged act of defamation, if any, has arisen on 26.08.2005, 10.10.2005 and 29.10.2005 and accordingly, the limitation to file the suit for damages in respect of the alleged act of defamation expired after one year from these days. As per statutory provisions, this suit in hand could have been filed on or by 29-30.10.2006 and record shows that this suit was filed on 01.09.2014, almost after more than 9 years of accrual of cause of action. On the other hand, learned counsel for plaintiff submits CS/6625/16 Page 15 of 17 that he had a continuous cause of action in this matter. 28. Article 75 of Limitation Act clearly stipulates that year of limitation of one year would begin to run when the libel is published. The language of Article 75 of the Schedule to Limitation Act is clear and unambiguous that period of limitation would start from the date of publication and it has to be interpreted according to the rules of liberal construction and in case of defamation, there can be no continuous cause of action. The incident has occurred in year 2005 and the plaintiff is claiming that complaints were lodged to police authorities on 26.08.2005 and further to the counsel of child welfare on10.10.2005 and on 29.10.2005 to National Human Rights Commission. And record shows that the present suit was filed in year 2014, which as per Articles 75 of Limitation Act is barred by limitation. This issue is accordinlgy decided against the plaintiff and in favour of the defendant. Issue no. 4 Whether no cause of action has arisen in favour of the plaintiff? OPD The onus to prove this issue was upon the defendant 29. Since issue no(s). 1 and 2 have been decided in favour of defendant. Accordingly, this issue is also decided in favour of defendant as no cause of action has arisen against defendant. CS/6625/16 Page 16 of 17 Relief 30. In view of findings on issue no. 1 and 2, the plaintiff has failed to establish its case and accordingly, the suit stands dismissed. No order as to costs. Decree-sheet be prepared accordingly. File be consigned to record room. Pronounced in the Open Court (Vineeta Goyal) on 25.04.2017 Additional District Judge-03 South District: Saket: New Delhi CS/6625/16 Page 17 of 17