Is Not Aware Of The Jewelery And Other ... vs Accompanied By Her Siblings Visited ... on 20 August, 2020 Government of TITLE SHEET FOR JUDGEMENTS IN SUITS Karnataka Form No.9 [Civil] Title Sheet for Judgement IN THE COURT OF V ADDL.CITY CIVIL COURT AT in Suits BENGALURU Present : Sri. C.D. KAROSHI, B.A., LL.M. V ADDL.CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE, BENGALURU Dated this the 20th day of August, 2020. O.S.2650 / 2018 BETWEEN Mohammed Abid Hussain, S/o P.N. Nazeer Ahmed, Aged about 40 years, R/at House No.87-1060B, Ganesh Nagar, Near Ramachandra Mission, Kallur Mandalam, Kurnool-518002. Andra Pradesh. Plaintiff ( By Sri.R.N, Adv. ) AND Misbah Fathima, D/o Shaik Abdul Azeem, Aged about 31 years, R/at Plot No.80, Shaiks Mansion, 6th Cross, Balaji Layout Park, Near Flag Post, Hegde Nagar, B. Ramaiah's Main Road, Bengaluru. And also at:- No.23/1, 2nd Cross, 3rd stage, P&T Layout, Pillanna Garden, K.G. Halli, Bengaluru. And also at:- No.8/4, 1st Floor, Above Suraina Medicals, Besides Punjab National Bank, Wheelers Road, Bengaluru. (D. Ex-parte) Defendant 2 O.S. No.2650/2018 Date of institution of the Suit : 07/04/2018 Nature of the Suit : Damages/Compensation Date of commencement of recording : 22/01/2020 of evidence Date on which the Judgment was : 20/08/2020 pronounced Year Months Days Total Duration : 02 04 13 [ C.D. KAROSHI ] V ADDL.CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE BENGALURU -: J U D G M E N T :- This is a suit filed by the plaintiff seeking direction to the defendant to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore) as damages and to return the gold ornaments or its equivalent value along with costs of the suit. 2. Brief facts are as under; That the defendant was given in marriage to the plaintiff on 01/04/2010 at AKS convention center, Bengaluru. The parties are governed by Sunni Muslims/Hanafi school amongst whom marriage is treated as contract. The said Nikah was attended by the friends and relative of both the parties and maternal grandfather of the defendant was the vakil for the marriage and nikahnama and nikahnama was drawn, wherein plaintiff agreed to pay mahar of 30 grams gold. The defendant was then pursuing her masters degree 3 O.S. No.2650/2018 in Biochemistry, accordingly mediators felt that plaintiff's educational background and employment status in Dubai would match and except the aforesaid fact there was no talk about dowry in the form of cash and kind either by the plaintiff or his parents, but on the contrary plaintiff had given 25 thola gold ornaments to the defendant at the time of marriage. The plaintiff refused to accept the dowry that was offered to him by the parents of the defendant as witnessed by the witnesses, later on it came to know that the parents of defendant had deposited Rs.7,00,000/- as FD in the name of defendant and plaintiff is not aware of the jewelery and other articles given by the parents of the defendant. Father of the defendant was employed at Saudi Arabia and thus he, befitting his status presented a Rado watch and finger ring to the plaintiff which was a customary gift at the time of marriage. Further it is averred that, the plaintiff stayed at Bengaluru in the house of parents of defendant for three days and thereafter on 04/04/2010 he left to Dubai. In the meanwhile the defendant accompanied by her siblings visited matrimonial home at Kurnool and stayed with plaintiff's parents for a day and left back to Bengaluru. Further the defendant traveled for the first time to Dubai with plaintiff on 24/04/2010 and stayed at Dubai with all amenities provided by the employer of the plaintiff. The plaintiff had immense love and affection towards the defendant, though defendant responded to the emotions at she was forlorn which left the plaintiff puzzled, accordingly plaintiff left no opportunity to keep the defendant happy, thereafter she expressed her desire to travel to Bengaluru to meet her parents, accordingly she return back at the cost of plaintiff on 28/05/2010 and thereafter returned to Dubai on 21/06/2010. Then the plaintiff came to know that during her stay 4 O.S. No.2650/2018 defendant had withdrawn FD of Rs.7,00,000/- and transferred to the account of plaintiff's father, thereafter the plaintiff re-transferred Rs.7,00,000/- in two installments to the account of defendant's mother. Thereafter the defendant had been to Bengaluru on several time and return back to Dubai. During the said period she was found pregnant, though the defendant was entitled for the treatment under the policy of employer, yet she desired to go to Bengaluru, again she return back and on several times underwent regular check up and delivered the baby at Bengaluru on 16/07/2011 at Manjunath Maternity Home, Bengaluru. Thereafter the plaintiff came to Bengaluru and gave a 100 gram gold biscuit for defendant and son in front of her relatives, a 20 gram gold coin was also given to the mother of defendant for her services in helping the defendant during child birth. Again the plaintiff also gifted a 100 gram gold biscuit to defendant at the time of naming ceremony, after getting passport of the child again they left to Dubai on 04/11/2011, where the plaintiff and defendant spent memorable time which were all captured in photos. Again the defendant return back to Bengaluru along with the child. So due to frequent travel of the defendant the plaintiff pleaded that he could not meet the said expenses of the travel and cost of gifts, but her parents insisted that either the plaintiff keep her happy or give divorce. Thereafter the defendant had packed all her belongings and valuables and left Dubai. Further the plaintiff made efforts to settle the issue amicably during January 2013. In the meanwhile he received a call from a person named Mohammed Qurashi who threatened the plaintiff to divorce the defendant and give her money else the plaintiff would be harmed. The plaintiff came to know from the relatives of the defendant that she was in a 5 O.S. No.2650/2018 relationship with the said person even as a school going girl and had aborted once and thereafter she continued said relationship and when the plaintiff called him back the said person accepted the illicit relationship with the defendant even before and after marriage, then only the plaintiff realized the whole game plan of forcing him to send the defendant to Bengaluru when ever she desired and allow her to be in the company of said person. The plaintiff after scanning through her telephone call records found that such calls were innumerable and estimated to be 10000 calls and 16000 SMS were exchanged. The said Mohammed had also visited the house of plaintiff at Dubai when he was out for work, so when the plaintiff unearthed the immoral life led by the defendant, the defendant and her parents without any loss of time filed C.Misc.No.371/2012 before the Magistrate Court, Mayo Hall, Bengaluru under the provisions of Domestic Violence Act with the following allegations that were untrue, false and defamatory. a. The the parents of the defendant gave gold jewelry household articles, furniture worth more than 15 lakhs as demanded by plaintiff. b. That the parents of the plaintiff harassed the defendant mentally and physically when she was at matrimonial home for 15 days. c. That parents of the defendant paid a sum of Rs.7 lakhs to the plaintiff as the dowry as demanded by the plaintiff and his parents. d. That in Dubai the plaintiff use to harass the defendant physically, mentally and sexually and that he behaved violently and abused the defendant and her family members. e. That he doubted the fidelity of the defendant and that he forced her to under go DNA test. 6 O.S. No.2650/2018 f. That the plaintiff use to watch porn movie and wanted to the defendant to act accordingly and to have sex in an unnatural way, and when refused the plaintiff use to beat, hit and slap the defendant and that she sustained injuries. g. That even when the defendant was not well, the plaintiff use to forcibly have sex and that he had sex always in his mind. h. That the plaintiff use to check the phone of the defendant and that he never allowed her to watch television or use the computer or laptop and he never allowed the defendant to speak to her relatives and restrained her from venturing out of the house. i. That she was not given proper food and was given one week old bread to eat. j. That the plaintiff demanded defendant to get a property share from her parents and use to demand dowry. k. That the plaintiff never treated the defendant with love and affection. l. That the plaintiff use to take her to his sister house where she was forced to wash the clothes, utensils and do house hold work. m. That the plaintiff is a sexual maniac and many other unsubstantiated and bald/vague allegations. Further it is averred that, the plaintiff came down to Bengaluru and lodged PCR No.51417/2013 against the defendant and her brothers along with her paramour for the offence punishable under Section 497 and 498 of IPC along with the provisions of I.T. Act . In turn the defendant also lodged a complaint with the Frazor Town police on 21/08/2013 for the offence punishable under Section 498(A) of IPC r/w Section 3 and 4 of D.P. Act containing the following false and defamatory allegations. 7 O.S. No.2650/2018 a. During her stay in Kurnool the defendant was tortured by her in-laws stating that she was not beautiful and did not bring much dowry and that the plaintiff would have got more dowry if had married elsewhere. b. During her stay in Dubai, the plaintiff tortured her scolded her for no reason and forced her to have unnatural sex with him. He watches sex movies and forced her to perform sex like that. c. That the plaintiff sent defendant to Bengaluru on 28/05/2010 to transfer the money in the F.D. to the account of the father of the plaintiff and threatened that the plaintiff would not call her back to Dubai if she did not transfer the money. d. That the plaintiff tortured her kept her locked inside a room and prevented her from talking on telephone. The plaintiff never allowed her to have a mobile phone. Whenever she talked to her parents the plaintiff used to keep the speaker phone on and listen to the conversation. e. That the parents and siblings of the plaintiff demanded money from the defendant and to get her share in the property. That when she refuses the plaintiff bet her with slipper and belts and forced her to commit suicide. f. That the plaintiff sent the defendant to Bengaluru for treatment at the cost of her parents on 23/09/2010. That the plaintiff used to suspect the character and conduct of the defendant and used to suspect the paternity of the child. The plaintiff got a DNA test done to confirm the paternity. g. That at the naming ceremony the parents of the plaintiff demanded Rs.5 lakhs as gift and that the parents of the defendant gave gold coins weighing 20 grams to the plaintiff. h. That the plaintiff took the defendant to his sister's house and beat her in front of his sister and that the plaintiff's sister and her husband lock the defendant inside a room and threatened her go back to India and get her share in the property. 8 O.S. No.2650/2018 Further the aforesaid fact was followed by C.Misc No.109/2013 filed by the defendant before the Family Court, Bengaluru for maintenance, O.S. No.51/2013 for permanent injunction and O.S. No.48/2013 for dissolution of marriage. Due to the said act of the defendant the parents of the plaintiff stopped venturing out even to the mosque and later he suffered a heart attack and underwent a surgery. The plaintiff then contested the aforesaid proceedings. The said paramour spoke to the plaintiff over the phone stating that he would have sex with defendant when ever he liked and plaintiff could do nothing, by the said act the defendant has violated the contract of marriage which demanded her to be polite/dutiful/chaste and obedient, on the contrary she has lodged cases one after the other based on false allegations which are perse defamatory and has sullied the image of the plaintiff amongst his relatives, friends and colleagues. The aforesaid litigations came to be ended in favour of plaintiff. As such, the defendant has indulged in verbal slander against the plaintiff in court proceedings without any proof thereof and as a result of such defamatory statement his entire family members are put to great loss of reputation and image in the society and unable to secure any marriage alliance due to the aforesaid litigations. Apart from this the defendant is also holding 65 thola of gold ornaments purchased at Dubai. The near and dear relatives of the defendant are all witness to the said fact. Cause of action arose to file the suit during November 2012 when C.Misc. No.371/2012 was filed and continued to be even after dismissal of the miscellaneous petitions and suits every day. On these grounds plaintiffs prayed for decreeing the suit with cost. 9 O.S. No.2650/2018 3. Records reveal that summons issued by this court returned with an endorsement as defendant not residing/vacated, but despite summons issued by substitute service in a daily news paper dated 15/06/2019 the defendant remained absent on 10/07/2019 and 13/08/2019, accordingly placed as exparte, and case was posted for plaintiffs' evidence. 4. In order to prove his case, plaintiff examined himself as PW.1 and got marked the documents at Ex.P1 to 18. 5. Heard the arguments through V.C. and perused the material on record. 6. Points arise for my consideration are; 1) Whether the plaintiff proves that the defendant with an intention to harm the reputation and feelings of himself and family/relatives has made alleged defamatory statements in criminal and civil proceedings ? 2) Whether the plaintiff further proves that he gave 65 tholas of gold at the time of marriage and subsequently to the defendant? 3) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for damages of Rs.1,00,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore) along with interest? 4) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for 65 tholas of gold or its equivalent value from the defendant? 5) Whether suit of the plaintiff in the present form is maintainable in the eye of law? 6) Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the reliefs as sought for? 7) What Order or Decree ? 10 O.S. No.2650/2018 7. My findings on the above points are as under : Point No.1  In the negative Point No.2  In the negative Point No.3  In the negative Point No.4  In the negative Point No.5  In the negative Point No.6  In the negative Point No.7  As per final orders for the following : -: R E A S O N S :- 8. Point Nos.1 to 5 :- I take these points altogether for my discussion as the facts overlap and for the sake of convenience. 9. It is worth to note that the plaintiff has filed the above numbered suit seeking direction to the defendant to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,00,000/- (Rupees One Crore) as damages and to return the gold ornaments or its equivalent value along with costs of the suit. In this regard the plaintiff has filed an affidavit in lieu of oral evidence and examined himself as PW.1 by reiterating entire averments of plaint as stated in para 3 supra. As such I feel that again it is not necessary to reproduce the same. In order to support his oral testimony PW.1 got marked documents at Ex.P-1 to P-18. 10. Records reveal that despite substitute service of suit summons the defendant remained exparte. In such circumstances this Court has to appreciate the oral evidence of PW.1 along with the 11 O.S. No.2650/2018 documentary evidence available on record only. It is settled that according to section 101 of Evidence Act- burden lies on the plaintiff to prove his case on basis of material available, as such he cannot rely on weakness or absence of defense of defendant to discharge the onus. So, on careful evaluation of the aforesaid oral and documentary evidence, we can find that so far as in respect of parties to the suit are governed by Mohammedan Law is concern there is no dispute. It is also not in dispute that marriage of the plaintiff with defendant was solemnized on 01/04/2010 at AKS Convention Center, Bengaluru as per Sunni Muslims governed by Hanafi school, which can be treated as contract between the parties. It is an admitted fact that as per the said Nikaha the plaintiff along with defendant had been to Dubai, where they stayed and during that period the defendant gave birth to a male child. 11. As could be seen from the perusal of evidence of P.W. 1 along with Ex.P.1 to 18 i.e. certified copies of application in C.Misc.No.371/2012, 'B' report, order sheet in C.C. No.57253/2017 and in C.Misc.No.109/2013, judgment in O.S. No.51/2013, order sheet in Cr.No.252/2013, complaint, translated marriage certificate, FIR in Cr.No.252/2013, application in Crl.Misc.No.109/2013, plaint in O.S. No.51/2013, judgment in O.S. No.48/2013, decree passed in O.S. No.48/2013, evidence/cross-examination of P.W. 1 in Crl.Misc.No.371/2012, order sheet in Crl.No.252/2013 and in C.C. No.57253/2017, orders passed in Crl.Misc.No.109/2013 and judgment passed in O.S. No.51/2013 that the defendant wife filed several criminal and civil proceedings against plaintiff husband for the alleged offence of cruelty, dowry harassment i.e. physical and 12 O.S. No.2650/2018 mental harassment including maintenance and domestic violence before different courts of law at Bengaluru. It is evident from the perusal of Ex.P.12 that lastly on 12/02/2014 marriage of the defendant with the present plaintiff which was performed on 01/04/2010 came to be dissolved and the same has not been disputed by either side in the aforesaid proceedings. 12. But it is the specific case of the plaintiff that, the defendant has made false and baseless allegations in all civil and criminal proceedings and thereby defamed him, accordingly he sought direction to the defendant to pay damages and to return golden ornaments or its equivalent value along with interest and cost of the suit. The relevant statements or allegations said to have been made by the defendant in all the aforesaid proceedings are as under:- a. The parents of the defendant i.e. wife gave gold jewelry household articles, furniture worth more than 15 lakhs as demanded by plaintiff. b. That the parents of the plaintiff i.e. husband harassed the defendant mentally and physically when she was at matrimonial home for 15 days. c. That parents of the defendant i.e. wife paid a sum of Rs.7 lakhs to the plaintiff as the dowry as demanded by the plaintiff and his parents. d. That in Dubai the plaintiff i.e. husband use to harass the defendant physically, mentally and sexually and that he behaved violently and abused the defendant and her family members. e. That he doubted the fidelity of the defendant i.e. wife and that he forced her to under go DNA test. 13 O.S. No.2650/2018 f. That the plaintiff i.e. husband use to watch porn movie and wanted to the defendant to act accordingly and to have sex in an unnatural way, and when refused the plaintiff use to beat, hit and slap the defendant and that she sustained injuries. g. That even when the defendant I.e wife was not well, the plaintiff use to forcibly have sex and that he had sex always in his mind. h. That the plaintiff i.e. husband use to check the phone of the defendant and that he never allowed her to watch television or use the computer or laptop and he never allowed the defendant to speak to her relatives and restrained her from venturing out of the house. i. That she was not given proper food and was given one week old bread to eat. j. That the plaintiff i.e. husband demanded defendant to get a property share from her parents and use to demand dowry. k. That the plaintiff i.e. husband never treated the defendant with love and affection. l. That the plaintiff I.e husband use to take her to his sister house where she was forced to wash the clothes, utensils and do house hold work. m. That the plaintiff i.e. husband is a sexual maniac and many other unsubstantiated and bald/vague allegations. n. During her stay in Kurnool the defendant i.e. wife was tortured by her in-laws stating that she was not beautiful and did not bring much dowry and that the plaintiff would have got more dowry if had married elsewhere. o. During her stay in Dubai, the plaintiff i.e. husband tortured her scolded her for no reason and forced her to have unnatural sex with him. He watches sex movies and forced her to perform sex like that. p. That the plaintiff i.e. husband sent defendant to Bengaluru on 28/05/2010 to transfer the money in 14 O.S. No.2650/2018 the F.D. to the account of the father of the plaintiff and threatened that the plaintiff would not call her back to Dubai if she did not transfer the money. q. That the plaintiff i.e. husband tortured her kept her locked inside a room and prevented her from talking on telephone. The plaintiff never allowed her to have a mobile phone. Whenever she talked to her parents the plaintiff used to keep the speaker phone on and listen to the conversation. r. That the parents and siblings of the plaintiff i.e. husband demanded money from the defendant and to get her share in the property. That when she refuses the plaintiff bet her with slipper and belts and forced her to commit suicide. s. That the plaintiff i.e. husband sent the defendant to Bengaluru for treatment at the cost of her parents on 23/09/2010. That the plaintiff i.e. husband used to suspect the character and conduct of the defendant and used to suspect the paternity of the child. The plaintiff got a DNA test done to confirm the paternity. t. That at the naming ceremony the parents of the plaintiff i.e. husband demanded Rs.5 lakhs as gift and that the parents of the defendant gave gold coins weighing 20 grams to the plaintiff. u. That the plaintiff i.e. husband took the defendant to his sister's house and beat her in front of his sister and that the plaintiff's sister and her husband lock the defendant inside a room and threatened her go back to India and get her share in the property. In this connection Section 73 of the Contract Act reads thus:- When a contract has been broken, the party who suffers by such breach is entitled to receive, from the party who has broken the contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which naturally arose in the usual course of things from 15 O.S. No.2650/2018 such breach, or which the parties knew, when they made the contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it. Such compensation is not to be given for any remote and indirect loss or damage sustained by reason of the breach. 13. A plain reading of Section 499 of IPC reads thus:- Defamation:- Whoever by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter excepted, to defame that person". Explanation 4 reads thus:- No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 16 O.S. No.2650/2018 In this connection, fifth exception reads thus:- Merits of case decided in court or conduct of witnesses and others concerned- It is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case, civil or criminal, which has been decided by a court of justice, or respecting the conduct of any person as party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further. 14. It is also worth to note that, Article 19(2) of the Constitution provides that, nothing in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) of Art. 19 shall affect the operation of any existing law, or prevent the state from making any law, in so far as such law imposes a reasonable restriction on the exercise of the right conferred by such sub-clause in the interest of security of state, friendly relations with foreign states, public order, decency of morality or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence. So though freedom of speech and expression is regarded as a fundamental right of every citizen of India, the same is subject to reasonable restrictions that may be imposed under Art.19(2) of the Constitution. 15. In 'Salmond on the Law of Torts' says, a defamatory statement is a statement which tends to lower a person in the estimation of right-thinking members of society generally and in particularly to cause him to be regarded with feelings of hatred, contempt, ridicule, fear, dislike or disesteem. 17 O.S. No.2650/2018 16. So in the light of aforesaid proportion on the nature of defamatory statement and relevant provisions of law, this court has to see that whether publication of such statements in the judicial proceedings requires civil action or will get absolute privilege is to be considered. 17. It may be noted that, in a civil action for defamation, Privilege is of two kinds:- 'Absolute' privilege and 'Qualified' privilege. Absolute privilege protects a statement as no action would lie for it, however false and defamatory it may be, even though it was made maliciously with improper motive. As such, when the law of torts has not been codified, then cases of such civil liability of damages have to be decided according to the rule of justice, equity and good conscience. 18. It is to be noticed that, it is no doubt true that marriage of the plaintiff and defendant performed in accordance with their personal law can be treated as contract between the parties, so when the plaintiff husband claiming damages as a result of alleged malicious abuse of civil or criminal proceedings with defamatory statements, then the cause of action is similar to the cause of action for malicious prosecution, as such plaintiff has to prove firstly malice, secondly he must allege and prove that the defendant wife acted without reasonable and probable cause and entire proceedings against him have either terminated in his favour or process complained of has been superseded or discharged. 18 O.S. No.2650/2018 19. It is pertinent to note here that, on careful evaluation of the evidence of P.W. 1 along with contents of exhibits referred supra I do not find that because of the said allegations, statements and imputations made in the judicial proceedings the plaintiff's reputation had been lowered in the estimation of his family members, relatives or general public. On the other hand it can be said that the alleged statements or making unfounded indecent and defamatory allegations against spouse or his relative in the judicial proceedings certainly constitute cruelty only. It is evident that, based on these allegations only the defendant wife filed divorce petition, wherein the present plaintiff husband remained ex-parte, accordingly she has obtained a decree of divorce as per Ex.P.12 judgment from the concerned family court. Therefore, it can be held that, the plaintiff has failed to prove the fact that the defendant with an intention to harm the reputation and feelings of himself and family/relatives has made alleged defamatory statements in criminal and civil proceedings so as to grant damages as sought for. Moreover, though the plaintiff has claimed return of 65 tholas of gold said to have given by him to the defendant at the time of marriage and subsequent dates or else its equivalent value, but in this regard, absolutely there is no cogent oral and documentary evidence so as to consider the claim of the plaintiff on this aspect. 20. It has been held in the case of Royal Aquarium v/s. Parkinson (1892) 1 QB 431, 451 as referred in chapter XII of The Law of Torts by Ratanlal and Dhirajlal that, no action of libel or slander lies whether against Judges, Counsel, Witness, or Parties for words written or spoken in the course of any proceedings, 19 O.S. No.2650/2018 before any court recognized by law and this though the words written or spoken maliciously, without any justification or excuse and from personal ill-will and agent against the person defamed. 21. Similarly the Hon'ble High court of Bombay has also held in the case Templeton v/s. Laurie ILR 25 Bom 230 that, no action lies against a witness in respect of words spoken by him in the witness box although they are false. 22. So now it is clear that, in a civil suit for defamatory statements courts in India have recognized and applied the principle of absolute privilege to attach to the statements made in the course of judicial proceedings and statements contained in the documents made in judicial or quasi judicial proceedings on the ground that, it is a public policy that, a litigant approaching the court enjoys absolute freedom in making a charge and contesting a charge, as such a litigant must not suffer from any inhibition or threat of further prosecution or labour under any apprehension of the consequences of the statement made by such litigant in the course of a judicial proceedings. For these reasons it can be held that, a litigant must be protected from further litigations for having made statement perceived to be defamatory, in the course of a judicial proceeding. 23. Apart from these aspects whether this court has jurisdiction to try the present suit or barred by any law is to be looked into. 20 O.S. No.2650/2018 24. In this regard Section 7 of the Family Courts Act reads thus:- 7. Jurisdiction:- (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a family court shall (a) have and exercise all the jurisdiction exercisable by any district court or any subordinate civil court under any law for the time being in force in respect of suits and proceedings of the nature referred to in the explanation and (b) be deemed, for the purposes of exercising such jurisdiction under such law, to be a district court or as the case may be, such subordinate civil court for the area to which the jurisdiction of the family court extends. Explanation:- The suits and proceedings referred to in this sub-section are suits and proceedings of the following nature, namely:- a) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage for a decree of nullity of marriage (declaring the marriage to be null and void or, as the case may be, annulling the marriage) or restitution of conjugal rights or judicial separation or dissolution of marriage; b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person' c)a suit or proceeding between the parties to a marriage with respect to the property of the parties or of either of them; d) a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in circumstances arising out of a marital relationship; e) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the legitimacy of any person; f) a suit or proceeding for maintenance; g) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the custody of, or access to any minor. 21 O.S. No.2650/2018 25. From a reading of aforesaid provisions make it clear that, the present case also falls squarely under explanation (d) to section 7 of the Act, as the dispute arising out of a marital relationship of the plaintiff and defendant only. So on this ground also suit of the plaintiff is not maintainable and barred by law. Therefore, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that, any amount of arguments addressed by the learned counsel for the plaintiff do not have weight and cannot be accepted. Hence, I answer Point Nos. 1 to 5 raised for are in the "Negative". 26. Point No.6:- In view of my discussion made supra while dealing with Point No.1 to 5, I am of the opinion that, suit of the plaintiff is liable to be dismissed without cost. Hence, I answer Point No.6 in the negative. 27. Point No.7 :- For the foregoing reasons, I proceed to pass the following; ORDER The suit of the plaintiff is hereby dismissed. No order as to costs. Draw decree accordingly. [ Dictated to the Stenographer directly on computer, corrected by me and then passed in the office on 20th day of August, 2020 ] [ C.D. KAROSHI ] V ADDL.CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE BENGALURU **** 22 O.S. No.2650/2018 ANNEXURE List of witnesses examined on behalf of Plaintiffs : PW.1 Mohammed Abid Hussain List of witnesses examined on behalf of Defendant : - Nil - List of documents marked on behalf of Plaintiffs : Ex.P1 Certified copy of application in C.Misc.No.371/2012 Ex.P2 Certified copy of 'B' report Ex.P3 Certified copy of order sheet in C.C. No.57253/2017 Ex.P4 Certified copy of order sheet in C.Misc.No.109/2013 Ex.P5 Certified copy of judgment in O.S. No.51/2013 Ex.P6 Certified copy of order sheet in Crime No.252/2013 Ex.P7 Certified copy of complaint Ex.P8 Certified copy of translated marriage certificate Ex.P9 Certified copy of FIR in Cr.No.252/2013 Ex.P10 Certified copy of application in Crl.Misc.No.109/2013 Ex.P11 Certified copy of plaint in O.S. No.51/2013 Ex.P12 Certified copy of judgment in O.S. No.48/2013 Ex.P.13 Certified copy of decree passed in O.S. No.48/2013 Ex.P.14 Certified copy of evidence/cross-examination of P.W. 1 in Crl.Misc.No.371/2012 Ex.P.15 Certified copy of order sheet in Cr.No.252/2013 Ex.P.16 Certified copy of order sheet in C.C. No.57253/2017 Ex.P.17 Certified copy of orders passed in Crl.Misc.No.109/2013 Ex.P.18 Certified copy of the judgment passed in O.S. No.51/2013 List of documents marked on behalf of Defendants - Nil - [ C.D. KAROSHI ] V ADDL.CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE, BENGALURU 23 O.S. No.2650/2018 In view of the general instructions of the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka dated 03/05/2020 and 29/05/2020(VC) and as per the Circular of the Office of City Civil court dated 23/05/2020, above numbered case which was reserved for judgment today is called for passing orders in this office. Today is non sitting day. Accordingly, the judgment passed in this office vide separate order and also uploaded the same in CIS:- ORDER The suit of the plaintiff is hereby dismissed. No order as to costs. Draw decree accordingly. [ C.D. KAROSHI ] V ADDL.CITY CIVIL & SESSIONS JUDGE BENGALURU 24 O.S. No.2650/2018 25 O.S. No.2650/2018