Sri S R Vishwanath vs Sri Mohan Kumar A on 6 September, 2022 Author: S. Sunil Dutt Yadav Bench: S. Sunil Dutt Yadav 1 IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU DATED THIS THE 6TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2022 BEFORE THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. SUNIL DUTT YADAV CRIMINAL PETITION NO.2618/2022 BETWEEN: Sri S.R. Vishwanath, S/o. Sri K.V.Ramaiah, Aged about 58 years, Member of Legislative Assembly Yelahanka Constituency, Chairman, Bengaluru Development Authority, Siganayakanahalli, Yelahanka, Bengaluru - 560 064. ...Petitioner (By Sri. G.Arun, Advocate) AND: Sri Mohan Kumar A., S/o. Ashwathaiah, Aged about 47 years, R/at #265, 2nd Block, 6th Main, R.T.Nagar, Bengaluru - 560 032. ...Respondent (By Sri. C.K.Nandakumar, Senior Counsel for Sri Mohan Kumar G., Advocate) 2 This Criminal Petition is filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. praying to quash the order of cognizance registered in C.C.No.37125/2021 for the offence P/U/S 499 and 500 of IPC on the file of the XLII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (Spl.Court to deal with criminal cases related to sitting as well as former MPs/MLAs) triable by Magistrate of Karnataka and etc. This Criminal Petition coming on for Admission, this day, the Court made the following: ORDER The petitioner who is the accused has filed this petition calling in question validity of the order of cognizance in C.C.No.37125/2021 as regards the offence punishable under Sections 499 and 500 of IPC and has sought for setting aside of the same. 2. From the facts, it is made out that the petitioner is stated to have given an interview to a Television Channel viz., BTV on 10.02.2021 and it is submitted that the answers in response to the questions put forward during the course of the interview contained certain statements, which amount to commission of an offence under Section 499 and 500 of IPC. The complaint under Section 200 R/w Section 190 of Cr.PC has been filed before the Additional City Civil 3 and Sessions Judge on 30.09.2021. Pursuant to filing of the complaint, cognizance was taken by a reasoned order passed on 05.10.2021 and the learned Magistrate has opted to follow the procedure under Chapter XV of Cr.PC . Thereafter, it transpires that sworn statement has also been recorded. Further, at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, the learned Magistrate has also issued a Notice under Section 204 of Cr.PC. After recording the finding referring to the contentions, a criminal case has been ordered to be registered at the time of issuing Notice under Section 204 of IPC as per the order of 27.12.2021. It is in such context, the present petition has been filed calling in question validity of the order of taking cognizance while also calling in question validity of the order of 27.12.2021, at the time of argument. 3. It is the contention of learned counsel Sri G.Arun appearing for the petitioner that the proceedings are liable to be set aside, while looking in to the averments made in the complaint as well as the transcript of the 4 interview, which is a part of the complaint. It is submitted that the reference to 'Mohan' in the interview cannot be claimed by the complainant as referred to him. It is submitted that there is a reference regarding showing of photographs of the complainant during the course of the recorded interview. It is submitted that as to whether such photographs shown was at the instance of the petitioner is not forthcoming and in light of the said aspect, the complainant cannot be stated to be an aggrieved person. It is contended that the petitioner is required to be an aggrieved person and unless such nexus is shown between the statement made in the interview and the complainant, it cannot be stated that the complainant is an aggrieved person. 4. Reliance is placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of S.Khushboo Vs. Kanniammal and Another reported in (2010) 5 SCC 600. In specific, references are made to the observations of 5 the Hon'ble Apex Court in paragraphs No.33 to 35 and 37 to 40, which are extracted below. "33. We now turn to the question whether the appellant's remarks could reasonably amount to offence of defamation as defined under Section 499 IPC. In the impugned judgment dated 30.4.2008, the High Court observed that as to whether the appellant could claim a defence against the allegations of defamation was a factual question and thus would be decided by a trial Court. However, even before examining whether the appellant can claim any of the statutory defences in this regard, the operative question is whether the allegations in the impugned complaints support a prima facie case of defamation in the first place. 34. It is our considered view that there is no prima facie case of defamation in the present case. This will become self- evident if we draw attention to the key ingredients of the offence contemplated by Section 499 IPC, which reads as follows: "499. Defamation.- Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any 6 imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1. - It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2. - It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. Explanation 3. - An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.- No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. ..." 7 (emphasis supplied) The definition makes it amply clear that the accused must either intend to harm the reputation of a particular person or reasonably know that his/her conduct could cause such harm. Explanation 2 to Section 499 further states that `It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such.' 35. With regard to the complaints in question, there is neither any intent on part of the appellant to cause harm to the reputation of the complainants nor can we discern any actual harm done to their reputation. In short, both the elements i.e. mens rea and actus reus are missing. As mentioned earlier, the appellant's statement published in `India Today' (in September 2005) is a rather general endorsement of premarital sex and her remarks are not directed at any individual or even at a `company or an association or collection of persons'. It is difficult to fathom how the appellant's views can be construed as an attack on the reputation of anyone in particular. Even if we refer to the remarks published in `Dhina Thanthi' (dated 24.9.2005) which have been categorically denied by the appellant, there is no direct attack on the reputation of anyone in 8 particular. Instead, the purported remarks are in the nature of rhetorical questions wherein it was asked if people in Tamil Nadu were not aware of the incidence of sex. Even if we consider these remarks in their entirety, nowhere has it been suggested that all women in Tamil Nadu have engaged in premarital sex. That imputation can only be found in the complaints that were filed by the various respondents. It is a clear case of the complainants reading in too much into the appellant's remarks. 37. It may be reiterated here that in respect of the offence of defamation, Section 199 Cr.PC mandates that the Magistrate can take cognizance of the offence only upon receiving a complaint by a person who is aggrieved. This limitation on the power to take cognizance of defamation serves the rational purpose of discouraging the filing of frivolous complaints which would otherwise clog the Magistrate's Courts. There is of course some room for complaints to be brought by persons other than those who are aggrieved, for instance when the aggrieved person has passed away or is otherwise unable to initiate legal proceedings. However, in given facts of the present case, we are unable to see how the complainants can be 9 properly described as `persons aggrieved' within the meaning of Section 199(1)(b) Cr.PC. As explained earlier, there was no specific legal injury caused to any of the complainants since the appellant's remarks were not directed at any individual or a readily identifiable group of people. 38. In M.S. Jayaraj Vs. Commissioner of Excise, Kerala & Ors. , (2000) 7 SCC 552, this Court observed as under: "The `person aggrieved' means a person who is wrongfully deprived of his entitlement which he is legally entitled to receive and it does not include any kind of disappointment or personal inconvenience. `Person aggrieved' means a person who is injured or one who is adversely affected in a legal sense." 39. We can also approvingly refer to an earlier decision of this Court in G. Narasimhan & Ors. Vs. T.V. Chokappa , AIR 1972 SC 2609. In that case a controversy had arisen after `The Hindu', a leading newspaper had published a report about a resolution passed by the Dravida Kazhagham, a political party, in its conference held on January 23-24, 1971. Among other issues, the resolution also included the following words: 10 "It should not be made an offence for a person's wife to desire another man." The Hindu, in its report, gave publicity to this resolution by using the following words: "The Conference passed a resolution requesting the Government to take suitable steps to see that coveting another man's wife is not made an offence under the Indian Penal Code ." 40. A complaint under Sections 499 , 500 and 501 IPC was filed in response to this report. Like the present case, the Court had to consider whether the complainant had the proper legal standing to bring such a complaint. The Court did examine Section 198 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (analogous to Section 199 of the Cr.PC. 1973) and observed that the said provision laid down an exception to the general rule that a criminal complaint can be filed by anyone irrespective of whether he is an "aggrieved person" or not. But there is a departure from this norm in so far as the provision permits only an "aggrieved person" to move the Court in case of defamation. This section is mandatory and it is a settled legal proposition that if a Magistrate were to take cognizance of the offence of defamation on a complaint filed by one who is not an "aggrieved 11 person", the trial and conviction of an accused in such a case by the Magistrate would be void and illegal. 5. Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner also submits that the aspect of sanction under Section 197 of Cr.PC has not been looked into which amounts to a bar as regards taking of cognizance. It is further contended that the interview was in the capacity of the petitioner being the Chairman of the BDA and accordingly, there was a nexus between the interview and the office he holds. If that were to be so, the sanction under Section 197 of Cr.PC was a pre-condition for taking up cognizance. It is further submitted that in terms of Section 58 of the provisions of the Bangalore Development Authority Act, 1976 , the petitioner is to be construed to be a 'public servant' within the meaning of Section 21 of IPC and as regards the petitioner, sanction is required to be taken in light of the nexus between the interview and the position that the petitioner holds. As regards such contention, learned counsel for the petitioner relies on the judgment of the 12 Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of D.Devaraja Vs. Owais Sabeer Hussain reported in (2020) 7 SCC 695. The petitioner has also relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of Hemant Nimbalkar Vs. Sri Hon'ble retired Justice N.Santosh Hegde & Others reported in ILR 2014 KAR 3294. 6. It is also submitted that since the procedure is that of a summons stage, question of dealing with the question to be decided by way of a discharge application would not arise and this Court would require to decide the same while keeping in mind the observations made in the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Khushboo's case, wherein, the Court has also opined that the matter will have to be tested from the material at first blush itself and has specifically referred to the observations made in paragraph No.37 of the said judgment. 7. Learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent on the other would contend that the aspect as to whether the averments made in the interview would 13 fulfill the ingredients of Section 499 of Cr.PC is a matter to be tested during trial and that the averments made in the interview, transcription of which is a part of the complaint would itself indicate that the petitioner was referring to the accused. It is submitted that the question as to identity of the complainant not being clear is an aspect again to be established during trial. While referring to the contentions of learned counsel for the petitioner placing reliance on the judgment in Khushboo's case, it is pointed out that the facts in the said case is a completely different factual matrix and the statement made was as regard to class of the persons and it is in that context, the Court had an occasion to address the aspect of person aggrieved. It is submitted that where statement is made as in Khushboo's case addressing to a class of persons, whether any person considered to be a person aggrieved was the matter in issue and in that context, the observation of the Hon'ble Apex Court will have to be read. It is further submitted that the present factual matrix is completely different; that the imputation is made referring to the petitioner, the statement made in the 14 interview referring to certain instances including developments at Bhavani layout, R.T.Nagar would point out to identity being that of the complainant. It is further submitted that if the contention raised is in the nature of defence, such assertion made at the time of arguments is in the nature of defence, which also requires to be looked into during trial. 8. Learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent also relies on the judgment of the Co- ordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Dadiba Kali Pundole Vs. Bid and Hammer Auctioneers Pvt. Ltd. , reported in 2020 SCC OnLine Kar 528 and it is submitted that the Co-ordinate Bench referring to Khushboo's case has made certain observations regarding the context of 'applicability of the observations made in Khushboo's case' and the observation made at paragraph No.19 is clear and would point out that this aspect of aggrieved person may also have to be looked at and established during trial. Reliance is also placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex 15 Court in the case of P.K.Pradhan Vs. State of Sikkim , represented by Central Bureau of Investigation reported in (2001) 6 SCC 704 and in particular to the observation made at paragraph No.15, while submitting that the aspect of sanction under Section 197 of Cr.PC could be considered not necessarily at the first stage but also at a subsequent stage. It is hence submitted that this question could be left open to be decided by the trial Court. 9. Lastly, it is submitted that the interference in exercise of power under Section 482 of Cr.PC has to be with due conservatism and submits that the order passed by the trial Court both at the first instance, wherein, cognizance was taken electing to follow the procedure under Chapter XV of Cr.PC on 05.10.2021 as well as the order of the trial Court of 27.12.2021 are well considered orders and no case is made out for interference in exercise of the extraordinary power under Section 482 of Cr.PC, which has to be resorted to only as an exception and not as a routine matter. 10. Heard both sides. 16 11. At the outset, it must be pointed out that upon the complaint being filed by the complainant, order was passed by the trial Court on 05.10.2021 taking cognizance for the offences punishable under Section 499 , 500 , 501 , 502 , 120-B of IPC and the trial Court has deferred the matter for recording of sworn statement of the complainant on 18.10.2021. The learned Sessions Judge has opted to follow the procedure under Chapter XV of Cr.PC . At that point of time, the order that is passed taking cognizance is a well reasoned order and such application of mind at the first instance as is reflected in the order of 05.10.2021 cannot be stated to be not legally tenable and does not call for interference. The application of mind at that stage is at a bear minimum and such application of mind comes out in the observations made in the order of 05.10.2021. In fact, the learned Sessions Judge observes that after having heard the arguments of the learned counsel and on perusal of the averments of the complaint and the documents filed in support of the complaint, the Court is satisfied that the 17 complainant has made out a prima-facie case as against the accused. The offences have also been narrated and the Court has proceeded to take cognizance, while following the procedure under Chapter XV of Cr.PC . Such order cannot be stated to fall foul of the accepted principles relating to extent of application of mind at that stage. 12. As regards the contention of the petitioner that the averments made must unequivocally lead to reference to the complainant and in the absence of which, it cannot be stated that the complainant is an aggrieved person. 13. It is submitted that the bare reading of the transcript would not make out the case. However, after having gone through the transcript, it is prima-facie clear on a first reading of the transcript, which is a part of the complaint that there is a reference to 'R.T. Nagar Mohan' in the transcript. Unlike in the case of Khushboo, wherein, statement is made referring to a class of persons and the question of whether a person is stated to be an aggrieved person does not arise in the present factual matrix. As 18 rightly pointed out by learned counsel appearing for the respondent that there is a reference to Mohan of R.T.Nagar. It is further submitted that the reference to Mohan is further strengthened by a specific reference to certain developmental projects including that of Bhavani Layout. It is also to be noticed that the statements carved out from the transcript which are extracted below are self explanatory and would prima-facie show that there are insinuations and statements that are fit for being subjected to a trial and cannot be stated to be at the very first blush as not being defamatory. Following are the relevant extraction of the transcript. " аІҺ аІ…аІ§ аІ¶ аІң : аі•аІ№аІЁ аІңаІ°аіЃ аІңаІЁаіЃ аі†аі‚аі• аІІ . аІ…аІµаІ° аі†аІёаІ°аіЃ аі†аі• аІ¬ !аі† аІ…"аі†#аі•. аІЏ%аі†аІ‚' аі†аІІаІё (аІң аІ…) аІң*аІ— ,аі† аІ®аІ¤аіЃ/ (аІң0аІңаІџ,аІңаІ°*,аі† аІ¦3аІң . аІ†5 6 аІЁаІ—аІ° аі•аІ№аІЁ аІҺаІ‚аІ¦аіЃ аі†аі•7аІң/g.Г‰ аІҺаІЁ8 аІ€аІµ0аі†аІ—аі‚ аІЁ:аі†;аІ°аіЃаІµ аІ…аІ•=аІ®аІ— ,аі† аІ­="аІң#?аІңаІ°аІ— ,аі† @аІ‚A BC аІ…аІ‚аІ¤ аі†аі•7аІң/0аі†. аІёаіЃВҒГ‰Г„Гџ аі†аі• /D. аІ‰!аІңаІ№аІ°Fаі†,аі† аІ­аІµD Gаі†аі‚Gаі†аі–6,аі† %аІңаІ— аІЁ аІ…3аІң' (аІң /аі• . аІ…) аІң*аІ— ,аі† аі†аі• (аІң ВёГ‰Г†ГѓаІ¦=8 аІ…аІµаІ° IаІңаІ¤=аІµJ аІ‡аІ°аіЃаІ¤/!аі†. аІ­MаІңD,аі† аІ№ аі†NаІ°аІҰаі‚аІµ0аі† аІҺаІ•0аі† PГ‰Г†mГ‰Г– аІ…аІ‚аІ¦аіЃ аі†аі‚ P. аІ‡аІ¦аІЁаіЃN аІЏаІЁаіЃ (аІң:аІң/ аі†, аі•аІ№аІЁ 19 аІҺаІЁаіЃNаІµаІЁаіЃ 0аі†аі•' QRS (аІң:аІң/ аі†. аІ…аІ‚!аІңTВ°ГЁ, Gаі†аі‚Gаі†аі–6,аі† аІђаІ¦аіЃ GаІң аІ° аі†аі‚ /аі•D. аІ‰ аі† аІңаІЁаіЃ аІ‡mГ‰Г†ГЊГѓ аі•D аІ…аІ‚аІ¤ аі†аі• vГЂ,аі†аі‚аі•VаІң аі†. аІңаІµW аі†аі‚ /0аі†аі‚аі• %аІңаІ— аІљаІ¦аІ° аІ№; аі†аі–аІ¦аіЃ аІ№; аІңаІ°аіЃ GаІң аІ° аІ°аі‚IаІңY (аІң аі† ' аІ¦аІ°. аІңВҮГ‰ГЊГ¶ГЉаІ¦аіЃ GаІң аІ° Zаі†аі•0аі†аІҮаІµ*,аі† аі†аі‚аІџаіЃ# аІ‰ ;аІ¦аіЃ\ аІ€аІ— аІ‡]аі†аі‚#аі•vГЃ аі†. аІ€аІ¤ ( аі•аІ№аІЁ) аі†аі‚аІ°,аі† аІ‡аІ¦аіЃ\ аі†аІІаІё (аІң:аІң/ аі†. аІ…) аІң*аІ—7аі†аі•аІЁаіЃ аі†аі‚аІ°,аі† аі†аі‚аі•^ _аі†аі•6 (аІң:аІң/0аі†, аІңаІµW аІёаІ—аІџаіЃ MаІң IаІң*аІ—7аІң.. аІњаІЁ GаІң(аІңаІЁ *,аі† аІ¬аІҰаІµ*,аі† DMаі†аі•аІ¶аІЁ аі†аі‚:аі†аі‚аі•аІ¦аіЃ аІҺ аІ‰!аі†\аі•аІ¶. аІ…аІ¦ аі†a ВЁГ‰Г†Г¦ГѓаІ•5 3аІңаІ‚аІњ8 аІ‡6#!аІң\ аі†. bаі†аі•аІ·аІ•аіѓаІ·e: аІ†5.6. аІЁаІ—аІ° аі•аІ№аІЁ аІ°аіЃаІ¦f gаІҺаІ‚,аі† аІ¦аі‚аІ°аіЃ PГ‰Г† /аі•D аІҺаІ‚аІ¦аіЃ аі†аі• ВұГ¦. аІ¦аі‚аІ°аіЃ аі†аі‚аІџ#0аі†, аІ€аІ¤аІЁ аІ® аі† hаі•3аі† !аІң аІЁ:аі†аІ¦0аі†, аІ…) аІң*аІ—аІі аІ¬аІ‚аІҰMаІңаІі аІ¬аІҮ3аІңаІ—аіЃаІ¤/!аі† ,аІң аІ°аІ‚6 аІ…DаІёаіЃаІ¤/!аі†. аІ¶ аІң : аІ–аІ‚ VаІң, аІ–аІ‚ VаІң.. аі•аІ№аІЁ аІ…аІІ , аІ‡ аІ¤аІ° аІң0аі†аі• аІЏ%аі†аІ‚'аІ°аіЃ аІ¬аІ°ZаІңаІ°аІ¦аіЃ. аі†аІІаІµаІ°аіЃ аІёаІӘe аІҒWаІџ# аі†аІІаІё (аІң аІђ!аІңаІ°аіЃ GаІң аІ° аІ¦аіЃ аі•VаІң0аі†, аІ…аІ¦аіЃ Zаі†аі•0аі†. аІ‡аІµаІ°аіЃ J ВӘГЂГџ аІЁаіЃаІ‚,аІң аІң/0аі†, аІңаІµW аІң аі† аІ‡аІ°Zаі†аі•аІ•аіЃ. аІ…) аІң*аІ— ,аі† аІЏ%аі†аІ‚аІџ*,аі† аІџаіЃ# :аі†аі‚аі•аІӘ. bаі†аі•аІ· аІ•аіѓаІ·e : аІ…5.6. аІЁаІ—аІ° аі•аІ№аІЁ hаі•3аі† аІЏаІЁаіЃ аІ† C vГЂUГ‰Г†ВәГ‰Г†Г®ГѓPГ‰ :аі†аі–аІ° C (аІң /аі•* ? 20 аІ¶ аІң : аІЁаІ®m аІ®аіЃаІ– аІ®аІ‚ =аІ—аІіn аі†аі• !аІң\0аі†. аІ…аІµаІЁаіЃ аІ†5.6.аІЁаІ—аІ° аі•аІ№аІЁ аІң0аі†аі• аІ‡аІ¦\аІ°аі‚, аІ€ oаІ‚!аі† аІ†^аІ°аіЃаІµ .. аІ…аІ¦ аі†a аІңаІЁаіЃ аІҺp аІђ6,аі† аІ’VаІң/аІҮ (аІң /;аі•\ D. Gаі†#аі• аІ‡!аі†, аІ…аІ¦ аі†a аІҺpаІђ6,аі† аІ•аі‚:аі†аі‚аі• аі† аІ¬аІ°аІІ аІҺаІ‚аІ¦аіЃ аІ†аІҮаіЃаІ•/аІ°аіЃ аі†аі• !аІң\0аі†. аІЏ%аі†аІ‚аІџаІ° ВӘГЂГџ аІ†аІҮаіЃаІ•/аІ°аіЃ аІ° Fаі† (аІң /!аІң\0аі†. аІ¤ аІӘ аІ†аІҮаіЃаІ•/аІ°аіЃ, аі†аі‚аі•' аІЁ8 аІҒ6 аІ•аіЃ аІІ5 аІµ @/ hаі•3аі† Gаі†#аі• аІ‡аІ°аіЃVаі†/. аІњаІЁаІ°r аІ†^ аІҺpаІђ6,аі† аі†аі‚аІҰ8, аІЏ%аі†аІ‚аІџаІ°аіЃ 0аІңаІњ аІңаІ°sаІ—аІіn аІҺаІІ аІ°аі‚ аІ¬VаІң gГ‰. аІ‡аІЁаі‚N аІ€ аІ†5 6 аІЁаІ—аІ° аі•аІ№аІЁ аІ¤аІЁN аі†аі–аІљаІіаІ• Vаі†аі‚аі•*!аІң\0аі†. аІңаІµ *аі• аі†аІІаІё (аІңаІҰаіЃ /!аІң\0аі† аІҺаІ‚аІ¬аіЃаІ¦аІЁаіЃN .аІҺ аІ…аІ§ аІҺ.аІ†5, аІ¶ аІң (аІңVаІңВӘГЃ !аІң\0аі†. аІ¶ аІң : аі•аІ№C аІ…аІµаІ°аІЁаіЃN аІңаІ°аіЃ аІ…аІ‚аІ¤ аІңаІЁаіЃ аі†аі‚аі• аІІ . аІ¬' аІҺ аІЁ8 аі†аІёаІ°аіЃ аІ“ /0аі†аі‚аі•аІ¦аіЃ аІ…аІµаІ°!аі†\аі•. аІҺ%аі†аІ‚' аІ†^ аі†аІІаІё (аІң , аІ…) аІң*аІ— аІ—аі‚ (аІң0аІңаІџ,аІңаІ°*аІ—аі‚ аІ¦3аІң аІ‡аІµаІ°аіЃ. аІҺ аІЁ8 аІ€ oаІ‚!аі† аІЁ:аі†;аІ°аіЃаІµ аІ­="аІң#?аІңаІ°аІ¦8 аІ‡аІµаІ°аі‚ hаі–C @аІ‚A BC. аІ€аІ— аІңаІµW аі†аі‚6#аІ°аіЃаІµ (аІң аі† ' MаІң аІІаі‚ аІ№; аі†аі–аІ¦аіЃ GаІң аІ° аІ‡0аі†аі‚аі•аІ¦аіЃ. аІ‡аІµаІ°аіЃ аІңВҮГ‰ГЊГ¶ГЉzГЂГ„ GаІң аІ° аі†a аІљаІ¦аІ° (аІңаІ¤ аІң аі†аі‚аІ‚аІҰаіЃ аІ‰ аІ¦ аІ№аІӘ аІ¤,аі†аі‚аі•VаІңgГ‰. аІ№аІ¤аіЃ/ аІµаІ· аІ†аІ¦аі‚= 0аі†аі–аІ¤*,аі† DMаі†аі•аІ¶аІЁ gаІ—аІІ . аІ€аІ¤аІЁ аІњVаі† аі†аі‚аі•zГ‰Г¦ аІҺuаІҺp аІ†5 3аі†аі•аІ”' аІЁ8 Gаі†аі–' gаІ—аіЃVаі†/. аІ‡аІ¦ аі†a аі†аі‚аі•6аІ—аІіаІЁаіЃN Dаі•аІҰZаі†аі•аІ•аіЃ. 21 аІҺ аІ…аІ§ RаІ· аІҺp. аІ†5. аІ¶ аІң аІҒ= @=w : аІ‡аІ‚аІ¦5 0аі†x аІң аІ‚x аІ†^ аІЁаІ®m yВ°ГѓВёГЂаІ° аі†аі–,аі† аІЏ%аі†аІ‚' ^* аі†аІІаІё (аІңаІҰаіЃMаІңаІ— g@a аІ¦аіЃ=, аІ…аІ¦ аі†a y8аі•аІёаІ°аіЃ аІҺzаІђаІ†5 (аІң !аІң\0аі†. аІ‡8 аІҮаІµ0аі†аІ—аі‚ аІңаІ°аіЃ аі•аІ№C аІ…аІ‚аІ¤ аІ‡!аІң\0аі†, GаІң{аІң|аІңаІ° аІ‡аІџаіЃ# аі†аі‚аІ‚аІҰаіЃ аІҒ=аІ•аІ°аІӘ !аІңаІ–аІІаіЃ (аІң аІІ . аІ‡аІµаІ¤аіЃ/ аІ…аІµаІ° аі†аІёаІ°аіЃ аі†аі‚аІ°,аі† аІ¬аІ‚;аІ°аіЃаІµWаІ¦аіЃ, аІЁаІ®m аІ†аІҮаіЃаІ•/аІ°аіЃ аІ—аІ®аІЁ аІ№*g аІҺ ?аІңаІ°аІ¦8 ВҒГЂГ„Г†аІ—аіЃ vГЂГ†jg аІҺ аІ¦8 аІ…аІ•=аІ® аі†a аІҺ:аі† (аІң аі†аі‚6#аІ¦\0аі†, аІ…аІµаІ° аІ°аіЃаІ¦f аІ•=аІ® аі†аі–,аі†аі‚7аі†} Pаі• аі† аІЁаІ®m аІ†аІҮаіЃаІ•/аІ°аіЃ аІёаІ®аІӨ *!аІң\0аі†. GаІңаІ•аІ·аіЃ# аІ®аІ‚;аІҮаІЁаіЃN %аі†аі–8,аі† аІ•аІіnogаІ¦ аі†аІІаІё (аІң !аІң\0аі†. аІ¦аІҮ аІџаіЃ# аІ¤ аІӘ аі•аІ№C аІ‡аІ°8 аІң0аі†аі• аІ‡аІ°аІ¬аІ№аіЃаІ¦аіЃ. ВЁГ‰Г†Г¦ГѓаІ•5 аІ°аіЃаІ¦f аІҺz аІђаІ†5 (аІң аІ¤Dаі† (аІңаІҰZаі†аі•аІ•аіЃ. аІ¦аІІаіЃ аІ¤аІҒWВЂ (аІң аІ°аіЃаІµ аІ¬,аі†ВЃ аІ¤Dаі† аІңаІ—Zаі†аі•аІ•аіЃ. аІ¤Dаі† аІңаІ—!аі†аі• аІ…аІҒ0аІң) GаІңВ‚аІЁаІ¦8 D8 аІёаіЃаІµWаІ¦аіЃ аІё*аІҮаІІ . аІҺ8 аІ¤аІҒWВЂ (аІң !аІң\0аі† аІҺаІ‚аІ¬аіЃаІ¦аіЃ аІЁаІ®m аІ…) аІң*аІ—аІі аІ—аІ®аІЁ аі†a аІ¬аІ‚;!аі†. аІ¤ аІӘ Zаі†аі•0аі†аІҮаІµаІ° hаі•3аі† (аІң аІ¦ *аі• аІ¤ аІӘ аІ•=аІ® аі†аі–,аі†аі‚аІіPZаі†аі•аІ•аіЃ аІҺаІ‚аІ¦аіЃ аІ†аІҮаіЃаІ•/*,аі† аІ®аІЁ (аІң /аі•D..." 14. Insofar as the contention that the complainant has to establish himself to be an aggrieved person, it must be noted that once there is an allegation made with reference to a person with certain other facts that are brought out in the interview, that itself would point out to the complainant, which submission made is required to be 22 accepted for the present stage of the case. While exercising the power under Section 482 of Cr.PC, the Court exercises such power with due conservatism and only as an exception and not in the routine as rightly pointed out by the learned Senior counsel appearing for the respondent. The application of mind while taking cognizance at the first stage as reflected in the order of 05.10.2021 and as pointed out is well within the legal requirement. Subsequently, after recording of sworn statement, the learned Magistrate has passed considered order while issuing Notice under Section 204 of Cr.PC as per the order of 27.12.2021. 15. A perusal of the order of 27.12.2021 which has been assailed at the time of arguments would also reveal that the Court has heard the complainant and framed points for consideration and though cognizance was taken for all the offences including 120-B, Notice was issued excluding such offence of 120-B, which would also reflects application of mind of the learned Magistrate as is evidence from the observations made in the order of 27.12.2021. The Court 23 has also referred to the scope of exercise of power and requisite application of mind while passing order under Section 204 of Cr.PC after crossing the stage under 203, while referring to the order in the case of Shivjee Singh Vs. Nagendra Tiwary and Ors. reported in AIR (2010) SC 2261. As rightly noticed, the Hon'ble Apex Court states that at the time of issuance of Notice under Section 204 of Cr.PC, there has to be only a prima-facie case made out against the person accused for commission of offence and need not fulfill the standard of material available being sufficient for the purpose of conviction. 16. It is also necessary to take note of the observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Fiona Shrikhande Vs. State of Maharashtra and Another reported in AIR 2014 SC 957, wherein, the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that at the complaint stage, the learned Magistrate is merely concerned with the allegation made out in the complaint and has to prima-facie satisfy whether there are sufficient grounds to proceed 24 against the accused and it is not the province of the Magistrate to enter into the detailed discussion on merits and de-merits of the case. Clearly the order passed at the very first instance would satisfy such test as laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court. In the order of 27.12.2021, the learned Magistrate has referred to the ingredients of the offence and has clearly stated that the complaint has been perused and sworn statement of the complainant and his witnesses have also been looked into. The Court has also observed that the material on record would prima-facie indicate the evidence that is sufficient which is unrebutted at trial may resulted in conviction. 17. This Court while exercising power under Section 482 of Cr.PC does not sit as a Court of appeal and the detailed observations made with reference to the definition of the offence of defamation are sufficient so as to pass an order under Section 204 of Cr.PC. 18. As regards the question of prior sanction for the purpose of Section 197 of Cr.PC, the Hon'ble Apex Court in 25 the case of Matajog Dobey Vs. H.C.Bhari reported in AIR 1956 SC 44 has clearly opined that this aspect of sanction is a matter that could also arise at a subsequent stage and the Court may look into it at relevant stage. On the same line, the judgment relied upon by learned counsel for the respondent that the aspect of prior sanction would require factual analysis and can be looked into at a subsequent stage also, is a contention requires acceptance. It is to be noticed that for the purpose of sanction under Section 197 of Cr.PC, the nexus between the position that the petitioner holds, the functions that are required to be performed under the Statue and the context in which the interview was made is a matter for factual finding on appreciation of material which is best left to the trial Court. 19. Accordingly, the orders called in question do not suffer from any legal infirmity falling within the scope of Section 482 of Cr.PC so as to require interference at this stage. Accordingly, petition is rejected. 26 Contentions of the petitioner are kept open. It is also clarified that the aspect of sanction is also to be looked into at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, while taking note of the facts that may be necessary for determining as to whether prior sanction is required. Sd/- JUDGE PN