Sri B.J.Puttaswamy vs Sri N.Hanumegowda on 6 November, 2019 IN THE COURT OF LXXXI ADDL. CITY CIVIL AND SESSIONS JUDGE, BENGALURU (CCH82) :Present : Sri RAMACHANDRA D. HUDDAR, B.Com., LLM., LXXXI ACC & SJ, Bengaluru City (CCH-82) (Special Court exclusively to deal with criminal cases related to elected MPs/MLAs in the State of Karnataka) Dated: This the 6th day of November, 2019 Spl. CC No. 461 / 2018 COMPLAINANT:- Sri B.J.Puttaswamy, MLC Founder President / Managing Trustee, Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust ® r/o No.71, 4th Cross, 3rd Main Rajmahal Vilas 2nd Stage HIG Dollars Colony Bengaluru-560 094 (Sri Keerthi Hegde, Advocate for Complainant) V/s ACCUSED:- Sri N.Hanumegowda r/a. 52/1, 2nd Cross, 3rd main Road Kamakshipalya Bangalore-560 079 (Smt.D.K.Sudarshini, Advocate) 2 Spl.CC 461/2018 JUDGMENT This case is arising out of a private complaint filed by complainant before the 8th ACMM, Bengaluru, which was registered as PCR No.1477/2018. After filing the complaint, said 8th ACMM, Bengaluru took cognizance of the offence and posted the case for recording sworn statement. 2. In view of establishment of this court as per Government Order No.LAW 10 LCE 2018 dt.8.2.2018 and notification of Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka bearing No.GOB(I)1/2018, Dt.23.2.2018 exclusively to deal with criminal cases related to elected MPs/MLAs in the State of Karnataka, the entire records of this case are transmitted to this court and after transmission of the records, this case was re-numbered as PCR No.14/2018. 3. As the case was posted for recording sworn statement, complainant and his four witnesses gave their sworn statement before this court. 4. Learned predecessor of this court after hearing the arguments of counsel for the Complainant passed a 3 Spl.CC 461/2018 detailed order dt.3.7.2018 directing to register Special CC against the accused for the offence punishable U/s. 500 of IPC . Summons came to be issued against the accused for his appearance. Accordingly, accused appeared before this court and was enlarged on bail. Initially, accused appeared before this court i.e., party in person and thereafter he engaged a counsel to defend him. 5. Brief and relevant facts as set out by the Complainant in the complaint are as follows:- "This private complaint is filed by the Complainant by invoking the provisions of Sec.199 r/w 200 of Cr.P.C ., alleging that the Complainant is a Indian Citizen and resident of Bengaluru. He states that he is a social worker having dedicated his life for the past 40 years towards public service without any blemish remark against him. He further states that he was Member of Legislative Council and a former Minister of State of Karnataka. He enjoys political success and he is known to be a person of high integrity and moral statue and of unblemished character. 4 Spl.CC 461/2018 He also enjoys enormous good-will and reputation in the society. It is further stated by the Complainant that he is also the President of Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust which is being established for the betterment / improvement of Ganiga Community. The said Trust had proposed by means of an application to the Government of Karnataka for granting about 10 acres of land on long term lease basis. Accordingly, the Government of Karnataka has sanctioned 10 acres of land initially in Sy.No.112 of Nagaruru village, Dasanapura Hobli, Bengaluru North Taluk vide G.O.No.RD 367 LGB 2011 dated 20.9.2011 in favour of the Trust for 30 years on long term lease basis. Subsequently, said 10 acres of land was reduced to 08 acres of land dated 21.7.2015. It is further stated by the Complainant that, the said Trust having taken possession of the land and has applied to the Nelamangala Development Authority for sanction of plan for putting up construction. Accordingly, said Nelamangala Development Authority issued sanction plan 5 Spl.CC 461/2018 vide order dt.19.10.2013 in favour of the Trust. The trust has paid Rs.18,07,600/- on 20.8.2013. To that effect a receipt came to be issued. The Trust also paid Rs.1,40,089/- to Dasanapura Grama Panchayath for sanction of plan for putting up construction work in the said property. Thus it is stated that the construction is well within the parameter of the sanction plan. A specific allegation has been made by the Complainant that, though the accused knew all these factual factors, for the reasons best known to him, with an ulterior motive to extract money from the complainant, had lodged several false, frivolous and vexatious complaints. Likewise, he had filed complaint before the Karnataka Land Grabbing Prohibition Special Court. Said court after due enquiry passed an order dated 21.4.2017 and dismissed the complaint filed by the accused holding that there is no violation or land grabbing by the said Trust as alleged in the complaint lodged by the accused. It is further specifically alleged that, the accused could not succeed before the Land Grabbing Court. 6 Spl.CC 461/2018 Thereafter, he approached Anti Corruption Bureau, Bengaluru on 27.4.2016 alleging that the Complainant has illegally acquired Government Gomala Land and has misued his powers being a public servant and got the above said land allotted in favour of Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust. It is alleged in the said complaint that this complainant is very corrupt and has cheated the Government in various ways. Finally it is stated that the Complainant has illegally acquired all the lands with the help of the then chief Minister Sri B.S.Yedduyurappa and also with the help of other local authorities. It is further alleged by the Complainant that, this accused also filed complaint before Deputy Commissioner, Bengaluru on 30.6.2016 questioning the allotment of land to Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust. It is alleged that the said Trust has not met with basic criteria. It is further stated by the Complainant that, the Anti Corruption Bureau, Bengaluru conducted detailed enquiry against all the false and baseless allegations made by the 7 Spl.CC 461/2018 accused and dismissed the complaint filed under Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and issued endorsement on 8.9.2016. Specific assertions have been made by the Complainant that, due to the aforesaid enquiries by the LGC as well ACB and other public authorities, this Complainant has undergone huge amount of stress and humiliation in public life and this act of the accused is done with sole intention to defame his spotless reputation gained by the Complainant due to his work and perseverance. The accused with sole intention to extort money from the Complainant is trying to defame the spotless reputation gained by him. He further states that the accused is a habitual offender and under the guise of social service he filed these fraudulent cases before various authorities in order to arm-twist the innocent public servants for illegal monetary gain. The Public servants in order to protect their reputation in public paying huge sum though they have not committed any illegal activities. They pay the money to avoid unwanted defamation. 8 Spl.CC 461/2018 It is further stated by the Complainant that, he did not heed to the unwarranted pressure imposed by the accused for extracting money. He filed baseless complaint before Prl. Secretary, Revenue Department Karnataka on 11.7.2016 and also before Hon'ble Minister for Revenue, Karnataka on 28.6.2016. The concerned Departments have not raised any objections or charges against the Trust regarding any sort of illegality. The Complainant states that, the allegations made by the accused in various complaints being filed by him is to make wrongful gain and to create bad impression in the minds of the public about the Complainant and to defame his image before the public, family and friends and disturb the regular activities of the said Trust which is functioning in a smooth manner. It is further stated that, despite the baseless complaints being dismissed as false, the accused in order to harass the Complainant has once again filed another false complaint before Tahasildar, Nelamangala Taluk, Bengaluru rural district on 22.7.2017 not to effect katha, 9 Spl.CC 461/2018 pahani, etc., in relation to Sy.No.136/P4, New No.183 measuring 02 acres 14 guntas situated at Jakkanahalli village, Thyamagondlu Hobli, Nelamangala Tq., in favour of the Complainant. The accused has made defamatory remarks that the Complainant has not submitted the relevant documents to declare his assets and liabilities to Karnataka Lokayukta. It is enquired into and the complaint filed by the accused was dismissed. These series of complaints filed by the accused against the complainant, caused huge loss of reputation of the Complainant and damaged his good will. It is further stated that, with sole malafide intention to extract money from the Complainant, these complaints have been filed by the accused. Complainant has religiously without any delay submitted his detailed assets and liabilities before Lokayukta. It further alleged by the Complainant that, the accused approached the "Bangalore Mirror" news paper on 11.7.2016 to malign the reputation of the Complainant and furnished false information alleging several irregularities 10 Spl.CC 461/2018 of the Government in allotment of 10 acres of land to Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust, Bengaluru, he alleged that the Complainant misused his powers being a public servant got the said land allotted in his favour. Though such complaints were already dismissed, the print media without proper verification have published false news paper on 11.7.2016. Due to this false information portrayed in the news paper, the Complainant has been severely defamed and he had to unnecessarily give clarification to all his friends and well wishers. No such illegal activity has taken place in getting the land allotted in favour of the Trust. It is further stated that Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust has constructed a multipurpose community hall for the welfare of the Ganiga Community. Even he has invited Chief Minister for the inauguration of the said community hall. But this accused in order to defame the Complainant addressed a rudimentary letter to the Deputy Commissioner of Bengaluru Urgan requesting him to withhold the inauguration ceremony of the 11 Spl.CC 461/2018 community hall built for Ganiga community alleging that the said community hall was constructed over the land illegally acquired by the Complainant. Because of the said act of the accused, the Hon'ble Chief Minister who supposed to attend the said function, but he did not attend. Thus the Complainant was put to humiliation before the public for no fault of his. It is further alleged that the Complainant has not succumbed to the pressure tactics played by the accused. Accused did not stop his illegal activities, but he approached "Bengaluru Metropolitan Task Force' (referred to as BMTF for short) on 6.10.2017 on the issues stated supra. But the said complaint came to be dismissed. It is further alleged by the Complainant that the accused has been lodging one or the other false and frivolous complaints before Tahasildar, Karnataka Lokayukta, ACB and such other authorities even though there is no truth in such complaints. Only in order to defame the Complainant's name, character and spoil his image in the minds of the public, family and friend circles, 12 Spl.CC 461/2018 these complaints have been filed by the accused with sole intention to extract money from Complainant. The Complainant further states in the complaint that he is senior citizen aged 78 years. Due to this unlawful and dishonest activities of accused repeatedly filing false complaints one after the other, has affected the health of the Complainant and he was put to hardship mentally and physically. In order to curb the illegal activities of the accused, this Complainant filed complaint before Sanjayanagara Police station against accused. In order to counter the said complaint, accused has filed false complaint before Kamakshipalya police station alleging that the Complainant is threatening him. The misdeeds of the accused was not limited to filing the complaint, he also approached the television and print media and professed the same lie. All the allegations made by the accused are false, baseless, vexatious and frivolous. Unfortunately, the TV Channels telecasted the said news with sole intention to malign the reputation of the Complainant. The accused is behind 13 Spl.CC 461/2018 telecasting of such news. As the said false news telecasted against the Complainant at the instance of the accused, the respect of the Complainant was seriously damaged. Telecast in the Television etc., not only maligned reputation of the Complainant, but also maligned the reputation of family of the Complainant. It is stated that the Complainant and his family has earned the respect and reputation in the field of politics because of the hard work done by them. The accused by all his illegal means caused this telecast and publications in the print and electronic media, friends and relatives of Complainant residing various parts of Karnataka have started enquiring about the program being telecasted. The telecast does not bear any true facts, such telecast has caused loss of reputation of the Complainant. He further states that because of the illegal acts of the accused, the reputation of the Complainant was harmed. The accused has violated the provisions of Article 21 of Indian Constitution. He is deprived of his life and personal liberty because accused has ridiculed the hard 14 Spl.CC 461/2018 earned reputation of the Complainant which has directly affected the right to life of the Complainant. With all these allegations, it is prayed by the Complainant to punish the accused for the offence being committed under Sec.500 of IPC." 6. As stated supra, after issuing summons to the accused, he appeared before the court and was enlarged on bail. Substance of accusation under Sec.500 of IPC framed, read over and explained to the accused in the language known to them. He pleaded not guilty and claims to be tried. 7. To substantiate the case against the accused person, the Complainant himself entered into witness box and deposed as PW1 and also examined four witnesses as PW2 to 5. All these witnesses have been thoroughly cross examined. On behalf of Complainant Ex.P.1 to 61 marked. 8. After closure of evidence of complainant, statement of accused was recorded under Sec.313 of Cr.P.C., so as to enable him to answer the incriminating 15 Spl.CC 461/2018 circumstances appearing in the evidence of Complainant and his witnesses. Accused denied his complicity in the crime. 9. As against the evidence and records so placed by the Complainant, accused himself stepped into witness box and deposed as DW1 and got marked Ex.D1 to 94. During the course of cross-examination of PW1 as well as DW1, certain documents were confronted and also marked in the evidence. 10. After closure of evidence of both the sides, heard the arguments of learned counsel for for Complainant as well as learned counsel for accused at length. Meticulously perused the records. 11. Point that would arise for my consideration are as under:- 1) Whether the Complainant beyond all reasonable doubt proves that on 5.11.2016 accused herein did false fictitious allegations against the 16 Spl.CC 461/2018 Complainant in respect of encroachment of land at different intervals and also did false allegations before the Tahasildar, Bengaluru North Taluk and various other authorities, fictitious allegations and imputations which were duly published in news papers and also telecasted in TV channels, which maligned and harmed the reputation of the Complainant and thereby committed an offence U/s.499 of IPC punishable u/s.500 of IPC? 2) What order? 12. My answer to the above points is as under:- Point No.1:- In the Affirmative Point No.2:- As per final order for the following. REASONS 13. Point No.1:- Before adverting to the other aspects of the case, now let me analyse the arguments so advanced by the Complainant as well as accused in support of their respective cases. 17 Spl.CC 461/2018 14. Learned counsel for for the Complainant submitted before the court that the allegations made in the complaint and the documents produced by the Complainant so also the oral evidence spoken to by the PW1 to 5, do establish the guilt of the accused. In support of his submission, he placed reliance on various allegations made in the complaint as well as evidence being placed on record by the Complainant and also relied upon various documents. 15. As against this submission, the counsel for the accused also placed reliance on the the so called admissions of the Complainant and also relied upon the documents so also the evidence lead by the accused. He submits that the case of the complainant is false, frivolous and to harass the accused, false complaint is filed. 16. I have applied my mind to the arguments on both sides, meticulously perused the records. Now let me analyse the evidence on record placed by the Complainant and accused to know whether the Complainant has 18 Spl.CC 461/2018 established his case beyond all reasonable doubt or otherwise. 17. As could be seen from the records of this case and also documentary evidence adduced by the Complainant, they do demonstrate that accused has addressed various letters/allegations against the Complainant before various authorities. Contents of the said letters are quite necessary to be incorporated in this judgment to know that whether the assertions so made by the accused in his respective letters addressed as per Ex.P.3, 18, complaint to revenue Minister Ex.P. 19, Ex.P. 6, 10, 29, 22, 7, 12, 15, 9 and also publication in Mirror news Paper, as well as in the electronic media so also in Ex.P. 32 and other documents are perse defamatory. They read as under:- Complaint filed before Anti Corruption Bureau: Exhibit P3 dated 27-04-2016 ಬ.ಜ.ಪಟಟಸಸಮಯವರರ, ಆಗನ ಜಲ ಲ ಧಕರಗಳರ ಮತರತ ತಹಶಶಲ ಲ ರ‍ ಜಜತಗಜಡ ಸಕರರ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಕಬಳಸಲರ ಸಸಜನ ಪಕಪತ, ಅಧಕರ ದರಬರಳಕ ಮಡಕಜಕಡರ ಒಳಸಕಚರ, ಷಡಡಕತರದಕದ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ವಶಸಗಣಗರ ಸಮರದಯ ಟ ಟಸಟ (ರ) ಹಸರನಲ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಜಮಶನರ ಕಬಳಸ, ಗಜಶವಗಳಗ ಗಟಮದ ಅಮಯಕ ರರತ ಜನತಗ ಹಗಜ ಸಕರರಕಕ ದಜಟಶಹ, 19 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಭ ಟಷಟಚರದಲಯಶ ಮರಳರಗ ವಕಚನಯಕದ ಮಶಸ ಮಡ ಸರಳರ ಳ ದಖಲಗಳನರ ನ ಕಜಟರ ಟ ಜಮಶನರ ಮಕಜಜರರ, ಅನರದನ ಘಜಶಷಣ, ಜನಪ ಟತ ಯಕದ ಪ ಟಜಪ ಟಭರತಸದ ಹರಣ. (ದಜರನ ಪಟ 3) ಪತಜರ, ಒಳಸಕಚರ, ಷಡಡಕತ ಕದಕದ ಸವರಜನಕರಗ ಮತರತ ಸಕರರಕಕ ಮಡರರವ ಮಶಸ, ಬ.ಜ.ಪಟಟಸಸಮ ಸಸಕತಕಕ ಲಭ ಮಡಕಜಕಡರರವದರ, ಅಧಕರ ದರಬರಳಕ ಮಡಕಜಕಡರರವ ಜಜತಗ ಮಶಸ, ವಕಚನ, ಭ ಟಷಟಚರ, ಅನರತಕತಯಕದ ಸಸಜನ ಪಕಪತ ಇತಡದ (at page No.4) Complaint filed before Anti Corruption Bureau: Ex.P. 18 dated 29.6.2016 ಸಕರರದಕದ ಪಡದದಲ ಜಮಶನನಲ ಷರತರತ ಉಲಲಕಫಸ, ಹಸರರ ನಡಯ ಮಕಡಳಯ ಆದಶಶವನರ ನ ಧಕಕರಸ, ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ, ನಕಯ ಮಕಜಜರರ ಮಡಸಕಜಳಳದ, ನಗರ ಪಕಚಯತಯಕದ ಪರವನಗ ಪಡಯದ, ರಸತ ಯನರ ನ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ, ಅಕ ಕಮ ಕಟಟಡಗಳನರ ನ ನಮರಣ ಮಡ, ವದರ ಡ ತ‍ ಸಕಪಕರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಪಡದರರವದರ. ಸಕರರದ ಎಲ ಲ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ಗಳಗ ತಜರ ಸಕರರ ಅನರದನವನರ ನ ಬಡರಗಡ. ಸಕಸಲಯ ಜಮಶನನಲ ತವ ಮಡಲರ ಉದಶಸದ ಸಶವ ಮಡಲರ ಕಟಟಡಗಳ ನಮರಣಕಕ ಸಕಬಕಧಸದ ನಗರ ಅಭವವದದ ಪಟಧಕರದಕದ ನಕ ಮಕಜಜರ ಜಜತಗ ಗಟಮ ಪಕಚಯತಯ ಅನರಮತಯನರ ನ ಪಡದರರವದಲ. ನಗರಜರರ ಗಟಮ ನಕಯ ಪ ಟಕರ ನಲಯ ಲ ಪಕಕದಲ ಬಫರ ಜಜಶನ‍ ಪ ಟಕರ ಬಡಬಶಕದ ಜಗವನರ ನ ಬಡದ ಜಮಶನನ ನಡರವ ಹದರ ಹಜಶಗದ ನಲಯನರ ಲ ನ ಮರಚಚ ಲ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಕಟಟಡ ಕಟಟದರ ಈ ಕಟಟಡ ಕಟಟಲರ ಕಡತಗಳ ಪರಶಶಲನ ಮಡದ ಸಕರರ ಅನರದನ ಬಡರಗಡ ಮಡದ ಸಕಬಕಧಸದ ಅಧಕರಗಳರ, ನಶರರ, ವದರ ಡ ತ‍ ಸಲಭಡ ಒದಗಸದ. ಸಕರರ ನ ಉಲಲಕಫಫಸರರವ ಅಥವ ಮರಮಚ ಜತ ಬಲದ ಆದಶಶಗಳನರ ರಜಕಶಯ ಪ ಟಭವದ, ಅಧಕರಗಳನರ ನ ಅಮಲಶರಸದ ಭ ಟಟಷಟಚರ ಜಜತಗ ಶಸಕರರ ಮತರತ ಆಗನ ಮರ ಕ ಖಡ ಮಕತಟಗಳರ ಸಸಜನ ಪಕಪತದ ಮಡದ ಅಕ ಕಮಗಳ ಸಕ ಕಮಶಗಜ,ಳಸ ಪ ಟಜಪ ಟಭರತಸದ ಸಮದ ಮಡಲರ ಹಜರಟರರವದರ ಸಸಷಟವಗ ಗಜಶಚರಸದಕತಗದ ಹಗಜ ಇತಡದ 20 Spl.CC 461/2018 Complaint filed before Revenue Minister: ಸಕರರದಕದ ಪಡದದಲ ಜಮಶನನಲ ಷರತರತ ಉಲಲಕಫಸ, ಹಸರರ ನಡಯ ಮಕಡಳಯ ಆದಶಶವನರ ನ ಧಕಕರಸ, ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ, ನಕಯ ಮಕಜಜರರ ಮಡಸಕಜಳಳದ , ನಗರ ಪಕಚಯತಕದ ಪರವನಗ ಪಡಯದ, ರಸತ ಯನರ ನ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ , ಅಕ ಕಮ ಕಟಟಡಗಳನರ ನ ನಮರಣ ಮಡ, ವದರ ಡ ತ‍ ಸಕಪಕರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಪಡದರರವದರ. ಪ ಟಜಪ ಟಭರತಸದ ಸಮದ ಮಡಲರ ಹಜರಟರರವದರ ಸಸಷಟವಗ ಗಜಶಚರಸದಕತಗದ ಹಗಜ ಇತಡದ Ex.P. 19: ಅಕ ಕಮದ ತನಖ ಹಕತದಲರರವಗಲಶ ಮನಡ ಮರಖಡ ಮಕತಟಗಳಕದ ಉದದಟನ ಅಕ ಕಮಗಳನರ ನ ಸಕ ಕಮ ಮಡದಕತಗರತದರ ಲ ಕಯರಕ ಕಮ ರದರ ಲ ಗಜಳಸಲರ. ಸಕರರದಕದ ಪಡದದಲ ಜಮಶನನಲ ಷರತರತ ಉಲಲಕಫಫಸ, ಹಸರರ ನಡಯ ಮಕಡಳಯ ಆದಶಶವನರ ನ ದಕಕರಸ ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ, ನಕಯ ಮಕಜಜರರ ಮಡಸಕಜಳಳದ, ನಗರ ಪಕಚಯತಯಕದ ಪರವನಗ ಪಡಯದ, ರಸತ ಯನರ ನ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ ಅಕ ಕಮ ಕಟಟಡಗಳನರ ನ ನಮರಣ ಮಢ ವದರ ಡ ತ‍ ಸಕಪಕರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಪಡದರರವದರ . ಸಕರರ ಆದಶಶಗಳನರ ನ ಉಲಲಕಫಸರರವ ಅಧವ ಮರಮಚ ಜತ ಬಲದ , ರಜಕಶಯ ಪ ಟಭವದ, ಅಧಕರಗಳನರ ನ ಅಮಲಶರಸರರವ ಭ ಟಷಟಚರದ ಜಜತಗ ಶಸಕರರ ಮತರತ ಅಗನ ಮರಖಡ ಮಕತಟಗಳರ ಸಸಜನ ಪಕ ಪತ ಮಡದ ಅಕ ಕಮಗಳ ಸಕ ಕಮಶಗಜ,ಳಸ ಪ ಟಜಪ ಟಭರತಸದ ಸಮದ ಮಡಲರ ಹಜರಟರರವದರ ಸಸಷಟವಗ ಗಜಶಚರಸದಕತಗದ ಹಗಜ ಇತಡದ. Ex.P.-19 ಸಕರರದಕದ ಪಡದದಲ ಜಮಶನನಲ ಷರತರತ ಉಲಲಕಫಸ, ಹಸರರ ನಡಯ ಮಕಡಳಯ ಆದಶಶವನರ ನ ಧಕಕರಸ, ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ ನಕಯ ಮಕಜಜರರ ಮಡಸಕಜಳಳದ, ನಗರ ಪಕಚಯತಯಕದ ಪರವನಗ ಪಡಯದ, ರಸತ ಯನರ ನ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ, ಅಕ ಕಮ ಕಟಟಡಗಳನರ ನ ನಮರಣ ಮಡ, ವದರ ಡ ತ‍ ಸಕಪಕರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಪಡದರರವದರ. ಸಕರರದ ಎಲ ಲ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ಗಳಗ ತಜರ ಸಕರರ ಅನರದನ ಬಡರಗಡ. ಕಟಟಡಗಳ ನಮರಣಕಕ ಸಕಬಕಧಸದ ನಗರ ಅಭವವದ ಪಟಧಕರದಕದ ನಕ ಮಕಜಜರ ಜಜತಗ ಗಟಮ ಪಕಚಯತಯ ಅನರಮತಯನರ ನ ಪಡದರರವದಲಲ. ಆದಶಶ 21 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಮರಮಚರರವದರ , ರಜಕಶಯ ಪ ಟಭವ, ಅಮಲಶರದ ಭ ಟಷಟಚರ ನಗರಜರರ ಗಟಮ ನಕಯ ಪ ಟಕರ ನಲಯ ಪಕಕದಲ ಬಫರ ಜಜಶನ‍ ಪ ಟಕರ ಬಡಬಶಕದ ಜಗವನರ ನ ಬಡದ ಜಮಶನನ ನಡರವ ಹದರ ಹಜಶಗದಲ ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಕಟಟಡ ನಮರಣ . Ex.P. 6 ಭರತದ ಪ ಟಜಸತತತತಕ ಸಕವಧನದ ನಯಮಕಕ ಳರರದದವಗ ಪಬಲಕ‍ ಚರಟಬಲ‍ ಟ ಟಸ‍ಟ ನಜಶಕದಣ ಮಡಸಕಜಕಡರರವದರ. ಸವರಧಕರ ಧಜಶರಣ, ಅಸಕವಧನತತಕ ಸಕಸಲಯ ನಡವಳಗಳನರ ನ ರಜಪಸ, ನಜಶಕದಣ ಮಡ, ಸವರಜನಕರ ತರಗ ಹಣದ ದರಬರಳಕಯ ಜಜತಗ ಸವರಜನಕ ರಸತ ಕಬಳಸ, ಒಳಸಕಚರ, ಶಸಕ ಸಲನದ ದರರರಪಯಗ ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ, ಗಜಶಮಳ ಕಬಳಸ ಸಕರರಕಕ ಮಶಸ, ವಕಚನ ಮಡರರವದರ. ಸಕರರದ ಹಣ ಮತರತ ಅಸತ ನಷಟಕಕ ಕರಣವಗರರವದಲಲದ ಅಕ ಕಮ ಕಟಟಡ ಕಟಟ , ಉದದಟನಗ ಮನಡ ಮರಖಡಮಕತಟಗಳಗ ಆಹಸನಸರರವದರ. ಕ ಟಮನಲ‍ ದಜರರ ದಖಲಸಬಶಕರ. Bangalore Mirror News Paper: Ex.P. 10 The accused herein had approached Bangalore Mirror New Paper on 11-07-2016 alleging that there were "irregularities in allotment of 10-00 of land to Puttawamy's Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Trust (VGST)". Further he had alleged that "the trust had encroached 80 feet of nearby road". Ex. P-29 : ಗಜಶಮಳ ಜಮಶನನರ ನ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಸಸಧಶನ ಪಡಯರವ ದವಷಟಯಕದ ಒಳಸಕಚರ ಷಡಡಕತ ಕದ ಮಜಲಕ ವಶಸ ಗಣಗರ ಸಮರದಯ ಟ ಟಸ‍ಟ ‍ (ರ) ಹಸರನಲ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಸರಳರ ಳ ದಖಲಗಳನರ ನ ಕಜಟರ ಟ , ಅದಜ ಬ ಒಬ ಶಸಕರಗ ಪಬಲ ಕ ‍ 22 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಚರಟಬಲ‍ ಟ ಟಸ‍ಟನನ ಎಲ ಲ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ಗಳಗ ತಜರ ಸಸಕತಕಕ ಉಪಯಗವಗರವ ಹಗ ಟ ಟಸಟನ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ರಜಪಸಕಜಕಡರ ಜಮಶನರ ಮತರತ ಅನರದನ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಪಡದರ ರಸತ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ ಮತರತ ನಲ ಮರಚಚ ನಲಮಕಗಲ ನಗರ ಅಭವವದಲ ಪಟಧಕರ ಮತರತ ಬಕಗಳಜರರ ಮಹನಗರ ಯಜನ ಪಟಧಕರದ ಕರರದಶಶ ಮತರತ ಷರತರತಗಳನರ ನ ಉಲಲಕಘನ ಮಡರರವದಲಲದ ಸಸಳಶಯ ಸಕಸಸಗಳದ ಗಟಮ ಪಕಚಯತಯಕದ ಕಟಟಡ ಕಟಟಲರ ಅನಮತ ಪಡದರರವದಲಲ. ಬ.ಜ.ಪಟಟಸಸಮಯವರರ ಅದಜ ಹಕದರಳದವರ ಜನಕಗದ ಮರಖವಡ ದರಸ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಸರಳರ ಳ ಮಶಸ ವಕಚನಗಳಕದ ಸಕರರದ ಭಜಮ ಸಸಕತಕಕ ಕಬಳಸರರವದರ. Ex.P-12 ಸಕರರದಕದ ಪಡದದಲ ಜಮಶನನಲ ಷರತರತ ಉಲಲಕಫಸ, ರಸತ ಯನರ ನ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ, ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ, ಹಸರರ ನಡಯ ಮಕಡಳಯ ಆದಶಶವನರ ನ ಧಕಕರ, ನಕಯ ಮಕಜಜರರ ಮಡಸಕಜಳಳದ, ನಗರ ಪಕಚಯತಯಕದ ಪರವನಗ ಪಡಯದ, ಅಕ ಕಮ ಕಟಟಡಗಳ ನಮರಣ ಮಡ, ವದರ ಡ ತ‍ ಸಕಪಕರ ಅಕ ಕಮಗ ಪಡದರರವದರ. ಒತರತವರರದ ಸಕರರ ರಸತ ಮತರತ ನಲ ಜಮಶನನರ ನ ಸಕರರದ ವಶಕಕ ಪಡಯರವದರ. Ex.P-7 ಬ.ಜ.ಪಟಟಸಸಮಯವರರ ಖರಶದಸದ ಜಮಶನಗ ಖತ , ಪಹಣ ಇತಡದ ದಖಲಸದಕತ ತಕರರರ. ಸಮಯಕಕ ಸರರಗ ಲಜಶಕಯರಕತಕಕ ತಮ ತ ಆಸತ ಘಜಶಷಣ ಮಡಕಜಕಡರರವದಲಲ. ಸಲಸರರವ ಚರ ಸಲರ ಆಸತಯ ವವರವ ಸತಡವಗರರವದಲಲವಕದರ ಮಜ ಮರಖಡ ಮಕತಟಗಳದ ‍ ಬ.ಎಸ.ಯಡಯಜರಪ ಸ ರವರ ರಜವಶಯ ಕಯರದಶರರಗ ಮತರತ ವಧನ ಪರಷತ‍ ಸದಸಡರಗ ನಶಮಕಗಜಕಡ ಮಶಲ ಬಜಪ ಸಕರರದ ಅವಧಯಲ ತಮ ತ ಶಸಕ ಸಸನದ ಪ ಟಭವ ಬಶರ ಸಕಷರ ಟ ಅಕ ಕಮಗಳನರನ , ಭ ಟಷಟಚರಗಳನರನ ಮಡರರಕದರ ಮಶಲಜನಶಟಕಕ ಕಕಡರ ಬಕದದ. ಬಶರ ಬಶರ ಇಲಖಗಳಗ ಸಲಸದ ಮಹತಗಳರ ಸರಳರ ಮತರತ ತಪಸ ಮಹತಗಳಗದರ ಲ ಶಸಕ ಸಸನಕಕ ಅಪಮನ ಎಸಗದರ. 23 Spl.CC 461/2018 Ex.P-12 ಸಕರರದಕದ ಪಡದದಲ ಜಮಶನನಲ ಷರತರತ ಉಲಲಕಫಸ, ರಸತ ಯನರ ನ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ, ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ, ಹಸರರ ನಡಯ ಮಕಡಳಯ ಆದಶಶವನರ ನ ಧಕಕರಸ, ನಕಯ ಮಕಜಜರರ ಮಡಸಕಜಳಳದ, ನಗರ ಪಕಚಯತಯಕದ ಪರವನಗ ಪಡಯದ, ಅಕ ಕಮ ಕಟಟಡಗಳ ನಮರಣ ಮಢ ವದರ ಡ ತ‍ ಸಕಪಕರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಪಡದರರವದರ. ಒತರತವರರದ ಸಕರರ ರಸತ ಮತರತ ನಲ ಜಮಶನನರ ನ ಸಕರರದ ವಶಕಕ ಪಡಯರವದರ, 24 ಮಶಟರ ರಸತ ಬಟಟಲಲ, ನಡರಲಯಕಕ ಸರಳರ ಳ ಮಹತಯನರ ನ ನಶಡರರವದರ, ಲಶಗಲ‍ ನಜಶಟಶಸ‍ ಕಜಡರವ ಮಜಲಕ ಬದರಕ ಹಕದರ ಲ ಹತಡಗ ಸಕಚರ, ಷಡಡಕತರ ಹಗಜ ನಡರಲಯದ ಆದಶಶ ಪಲಸಲಲ ಇತಡದ. Ex.P-15 ಬ.ಜ.ಪಟಟಸಸಮಯವರರ ಮಶಲತನ ಚವಡಯ ಸದಸಡರಗದಲರಜ ಮಡರಬಹರದದ ಅಕ ಕಮಗಳ , ಅಧಕರ ದರಬರಳಕ, ಸಕರರ ಅನರದನ ದರಬರಳಕ, ಭ ಟಷಟಚರ, ಸಕರರ ಸವರಜನಕ ಜವರಶ ನರಗಳದ ನಲ, ರಸತ , ಕಲರದಯ ಅಕ ಕಮ ಒತರತವರ ಮಡದಲರಕದ ಸವರಜನಕರಗ ಆಗಬಹರದದ ತಜಕದರ, ಸಕರರ ‍ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳ ಉಲಲಕಘನ ಹಗಜ ನಡರಲಯಗಳ ಆದಶಶದ ಉಲಲಕಘನ. ಭರತದಲ ನಜಶಕದಣರಗರರವ ಟ ಟಸ‍ಟ ಡಶಡನಲ ಪ ಟಚಪ ಟಭರತಸ ವರಜಶಧ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ರಚಸಕಜಕಡರರವ ಕಕದರರರ ಅಜಶವ ಪಯರಕತ ಅಧಡಕರರ, ಅಧಡಕರ ಕವಪ ಇರರವವರಗ ಮತ ಕ ಸದಸಡರರ. ಇದಜಕದರ ಕಟರಕಬಕ ಲ ಟ ಟಸಟನಲರರವಕತ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳದರ ಸಕರರದ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಜಮಶನರ ಸಕರರ ಅನರದನ ಪಡದರರವದರ ಗಮನಹರ. ಟ ಟಸಟ‍ ಹಸರನಲ ಸಸಕತಕಕ ಆಸತ ಕಬಳಕಗ ಷಡಡಕತ .ಕ ಪ ಟಭವ ಅಧಕರದ ಬಳಕ ಮಡ ಸಕರರ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳ ಗಳಗ ತಜರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಜಮಶನರ ಪಡದದರ ಲ ಸರಳಳನ ಸರಮಲ ಸಲಸದರ. Ex.P-9 ಜತ ಜನಕಗದವರ ಉದದರದ ಹಸರಲ ಪಟಜಪಟಭರತಸ ವರಜಶಧ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ರಜಪಸ, ವಶಸ ಗಣಗರ ಸಮರದಯ ಟ ಟಸಟ (ರ) ಸಕಸಲ ಸಸಪಸ, ಸಕರರ ರಸತ ಜಮಶನರ ಒತರತವರ ಮಡ , ಗಜಶಮಳದಲನ ನಲ ಮರಚಚ , ನಲ-ರಸತ -ಕಲರದರಯ ಸಕರರ ಜಮಶನರ ಕಬಳಸ, ಸಕರರ 24 Spl.CC 461/2018 ನಕಸ ದರ ಕಬಳಸ , ಸಕರರ ಆಸತಯನರ ನ ಸಸಕತ ಆಸತಯನನಗ ಮಡಕಜಕಡರ ಸವರಜನಕರಗ ತಜಕದರ. Ex.P-30 ಜತ ಜನಕಗದವರ ಉದರದ ಹಸರಲ ಪಟಜಪಟಭರತಸ ವರಜಶಧ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ರಜಪಸ , ವಶಸ ಗಣಗರ ಸಮರದಯ ಟ ಟಸಟ (ರ) ಸಕಸದ ಸಸಪಸ , ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಜಮಶನರ , ಸಕರರ ಅನರದನ ಪಡದರ, ಸಕರರ ನಕಶ ದರಯನರ ನ ಕಬಳಸರವ ಮಜಲಕ ಸವರಜನಕರಗ ತಜಕದರ ಕಜಡರತತದರ. ಘನ ನಡರಲಯದ ಆದಶಶದಕತ ನಡರಲಯಕಕ ಹಗಜ ತಹಶಶಲ ಲ ರ ರವರಗ ವರದ ಸಲಸಲಲ, ಸಕಪಣರ ಒತರತವರ ತರವಗಜಳಸಲಲ, ಅಲಲದ ಸವರಜನಕರ ಬಳಕಯ ಉದಶಕಕರರವ ಸಕರರ ಜಮಶನನರ ನ ಇಕದಗಜ ತಮ ತ ವಶದಲ ಇಟರ ಲ ಟ ಕಜಕಡದರ ನಡರಲಯದ ಆದಶಶ ಪಲನ ಮಡದ ನಡರಕಗ ನಕದನ ಮಡದರ. ಸಮರದಯ ಭವನದ ಚಟರವಟಕಯಕದ ಹಣ ಗಳಸ ಸಸಥರಕಕ ಬಳಕರಗರತತದ. ಸರಳರ ಳ , ತಪಸ ವರದ , ಪಕಪತ ಹಗಜ ಕತರವಡ ಲಜಶಪ. Ex.P-32 ಸಕರರ ರಸತ , ಜಮಶನರ ಒತರತವರ ಮಢ ನಲ ಮರಚಚ, ಕಲರದರ ಒತರತವರ, ಸಕರರ ನಕಶ ದರ ಕಬಳಸರರವವರ ವರರದದ ಕ ಕಮ ಕವಗಜಕಡರ ಅಕ ಕಮ ಒತರತವರ ತರವಗಜಳಸದ, ಸವರಜನಕರಗ ತಜಕದರ ಕಜಡರತತದರ. ನಡರಲಯದ ಆದಶಶ ಪಲನ ಮಡದ ನಡರಲಯಕಕ ಮತರತ ತಹಶಶಲ ಲ ರ ರವರಗ ವರದ ಸಲಸದ ಸಕಸಸಯ ಅಧಡಕ ಹಗಜ ವಧನ ಪರಷತ‍ ಸದಸಡ ಬ.ಜ.ಪಟಟಸಸಮ ನಡಯನಕದನ ಹಗಜ ಒಳಸಕಚರ ಮಡರರತತರ. ತಕದ ತಯಯವರಗ ನಕಬಸ, ಶಕಣದ ಹಕಕಗ ಮಶಸ ಮಢ ಮಕಕಳ ಭವಷಡ ಹಳರ ಮಡರರವ ವ.ಜ.ಎಸ‍ ಎಲವಟ‍ ಇಕಟರ ನಡಷನಲ‍ ಸಜ ಕ ಲ‍ ಆಡಳತ ಮಕಡಳ ಮತರತ ಶಲ ಸಬಬಕದ. ಸಕರರ ಜಮಶನರ ಗರತತಗ ಪಡದರ, ಸಕರರದ ಸಹಯಧನದಲ ಕಟಟಡ ಕಟಟ ಬಡಗ ಕಜಟರ ಟ ವಡಪರಶಕರಣಗಜಳಸ ಅಧಕ ಶರಲಕ ವಧಸರವದಕಕ ಸಕರರದ ಷರತರತಗಳ ಉಲಲಕಘನ ಮಕಕಳ ಶಕಣಕಕ ಕರತರತ ತಕದದರ. ಜಗತತನ ಹಣವಲ ಲ ತನ ತನನಬಶಕಕಬ ಅತಶ ಆಸಯಲದರ ಲ ಮಕಕಳಗ ಮಶಸ ಮಡರತತದರ. ಮಕಕಳ ಶಕಣಕಕಕತ ಹತರತ ಎಕರ ಜಮಶನರ ಕಬಳಸರವ ಉದಶ ಇರರಕದರ ಮಶಲಜನಶಟಕಕ ಕಕಡರ ಬರರತತದ. ಮಕಕಳಗ ತದಲ ತಶಡ ಮರಕದನ ಪ ಟಜಗಳನನಗ ರಜಪಸಬಶಕದ ಶಕಕರರ ರಕಸರಗ ನಮ ತ ಶಕಣದ ಹಕಕಗ ಕಕಟಕರಗ ನಮ ತ ಭವಷಡದ ಹಳರ ಮಡರವಲ ಶಲ ಆಡಳತ ಮಕಡಳಗ ಸಹಕರಸರತತ ಮಶಸ, ವಕಚನ ಮಡದರ. 25 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಸವರಜನಕ ಶಕಣ ಇಲಖಯಕದ ಅನರಮತ ಪಡಯದಶ ಫಟಶ ನಸರರ ಯಕದ ಪಟಢ ಶಲಯವರಗ ವದಡರರಗಳನರ ನ ಶಲಗ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ನಜಶಕದಯಸಕಜಕಡರ, ಮಕಕಳರ ಮತರತ ಪಶಷಕರಗ ಮಶಸ , ವಕಚನ ಮಡ ಮಕಕಳ ಭವಷಡ ಹಳರ ಮಡರತತರರವ ವಜಎಸ‍ ಎಲಡಟ‍ ಇಕಟನಡರಷನಲ‍ ಶಲ ಸಬಬಕದ ಮತರತ ಆಡಳತ ಮಕಡಳ. ಪ ಟಭವ ಭಶರ ಸಕರರ ನಶತ ನಯಮಗಳನರ ನ ಉಲಲಕಫಸ, ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಸಕರರ ಜಮಶನರ, ಸಕರರದ ಸಹಯಧನ ಪಡದರರವದಲಲದ ಸಕರರ ಸವರಜನಕ ರಸತ ಕಬಳಸ, ಮಳ ನಶರರ ಹರಯರವ ನಲ ಮರಚರ, ನಕಶಶ ದರಯನರ ನ ಅತಕ ಕಮಸ, ಒತರತವರ ಮಡರರವ ಅಕ ಕಮ ಶಲ ತರದರ ಮಕಕಳ ಶಕಣಕಕ ಮಶಸ ಮಡರತತರರವ ಮತರತ ಜತ ಜನಕಗದ ಉದರದ ಹಸರಲ ಕಟರಕಬಕ ಟ ಟಸಟನ ವಷಯಗಳನಜನಳಗಜಕಡ ಪಬಲಕ‍ ಚರಟಬಲ‍ ಟ ಟಸ‍ಟ ನಜಶಕದಣ ಮಡಕಜಕಡರ, ಸಕರರದ 10-00 ಎಕರ ಆಸತ ಮತರತ ಸಕರರದ ಅನರದನ ಕಬಳಸರವ ಜಜತಗ ಸವರಜನಕ ರಸತ ಮತರತ ಕಲರದರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಹ ಒತರತವರ . 18. It is alleged that the aforesaid portion so culled out shows that the accused has made allegations against the Complainant in the following manner:- ಸಕರರಕಕ ಮಶಸ, ವಕಚನ, ದಜಟಶಹ, ಪತರತರ, ಸರಳರ ಳ ದಖಲಗಳನರ ನ ಕಜಟರಟ ಸಕರರ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಕಬಳಕ, ಅಕ ಕಮ ಸಸಧಶನ ಪಡದರರವದರ, ಸಸಜನ ಪಕಪತ, ಅಧಕರ ದರಬರಳಕ, ಒಳಸಕಚರ, ಷಡಡಕತ ಕ ಮಡ ಭ ಟಷಟಚರದಲ ಮರಳರಗರರವದರ, ಸರಳನ ಸರಮಲಯಲ ಮರಳರಗರರವದರ, ನಕ ಮಕಜಜರತ ಇಲಲದಶ ಕಟಟಡಗಳ ನಮರಣ ಮಡರರವದರ, ಅನರದನ ದರರರಪಯತಶಗ, ತಪಸ ಮಹತ ನಶಡರವ ವಡಕತ, ಚರ ಸಸರ ಆಸತ ಘಜಶಷಣ ಸತಡವಗಲಲ, ಲಜಶಕಯರಕತಕಕ ಆಸತ ಘಜಶಷಣ ಮಡಲಲ, ಶಸಕ ಸಸನಕಕ ಅಪಮನ, ಅಸಮಥರ ಅಯತಶಗಡ ವಡಕತ, ಸಕರರ ಆತಸಯನರನ ಸಸಕತ ಆಸತಯನನಗ ಮಡರರವದರ, ನಜಶಕದಣಯಲಲದಶ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಶಲ ನಡಸರತತರರವದರ ಇತಡದ., 26 Spl.CC 461/2018 19. As it is the case of alleged defamation did by the accused against the Complainant, now let me analyse the position of law with regard to law on defamation. 20. So far as defamation is concerned, as a principle of equity, every man is entitled to have his reputation preserved intact. A man's reputation is his property and possibly more valuable than other properties, and any words calculated to infringe this right affords a good cause of action. 21. It is stated that "no man may disparage or destroy the reputation of another. Every man has a right to have his good name maintained unimpaired. This right is a jus in rem, a right absolute and good against all the world. 22. This cause of action for defamation has been recognized from the very beginning of our civilization, and people have been resorting to mutual fights to smoothen out the wrong done to their reputation. 23. Then what is defamation? From what has been stated above the question of defamation has been primary 27 Spl.CC 461/2018 linked up with one's reputation that one commands among one's fellow beings and it is the infringement of this right to have one's reputation preserved intact that gives the cause of action. Broadly speaking defamation may be defined as a false and damaging statement. Salmond has defined it as a wrong that consists in the publication of a false and defamatory statement respecting another without lawful justification. It is conventional to say that, defamation includes a statement concerning any person which exposes him to hatred, ridicule or contempt. But this statement is no longer considered as exhaustive. The best method of approach to the definition of defamation is to consider it from the point view of the right which the defamatory statement is alleged to infringe. No doubt one's reputation includes all the moral and material advantages to which it may entitle him in his relationship with the Society as a whole. One's reputation may be so well established that nothing said or done on the part of the accused could harm it but still the accused would be liable not because he had harmed the plaintiff's reputation 28 Spl.CC 461/2018 but for his deprived intention and his tendency to cause harm. 24. As could be seen from the allegations made in the complaint and documentary evidence adduced by the Complainant, it is specifically alleged by the Complainant that this accused has used abusive language, the utterance of abusive and insulting language though can be regarded as penal both as an offence against society in general and as tending to provoke a breach of peace, yet for the purposes of enforcing a civil liability for defamation the use of the abuse or vulgar language addressed merely to cause mental pain to the person addressed may not afford any ground for such a claim unless its effect is to hurt his reputation or to expose him to hatred, contempt, ridicule, or obloquy, or to make him to be shunned or avoided by those who otherwise have associated with him. 25. Certain tests have to be conducted whether such a statement did by the accused are really defamatory in nature or not. That a certain statement is defamatory is to be adjudged from the point of view of ordinary, just and 29 Spl.CC 461/2018 reasonable people. The person to whom the statement is published may be one of the class of those persons who always attach a sinister meaning to every word that is uttered. Here in this case, series of letters / allegations have been addressed by the accused person, as per the case of the complainant before various authorities alleging that he has committed cheating, fraud, created false documents, illegally occupied the landed property of the government, misused his power, did conspiracy in getting the land granted to him, involved in corruption, so on and so forth. It is also alleged that, the Complainant has misused the funds being granted by the Government. Thus, a specific allegations have been made by the Complainant against the accused that this accused has committed the offence under Sec.499 of IPC punishable U/s. 500 of IPC . 26. For better appreciation of case made out by the Complainant, it is just and proper to incorporate the provisions of Sec.499 of IPC which speaks of definition of defamation as under: 30 Spl.CC 461/2018 499. Defamation.--Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases hereinafter expected, to defame that person. Explanation 1.--It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives. Explanation 2.--It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a company or an association or collection of persons as such. 31 Spl.CC 461/2018 Explanation 3.--An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically, may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.--No imputation is said to harm a person's reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others, lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person, or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a state generally considered as disgraceful. 27. The reading of Section will reveal that the offence of defamation for which Sec.499 of IPC makes a provision, is presented here in a form materially at variance on two important points from that in which the offence is understood in English law. Even the very principle underlying the two forms of offence is different. So far as, application of this definition in India in the 32 Spl.CC 461/2018 matter of proceedings of defamation, there distinction maintained between the criminal proceedings and civil proceedings for defamation. So far as criminal proceedings are concerned, the law of defamation is not matter of common law, but is matter of statute and of Sec.499 of IPC. 28. In a case of present nature, heavy burden lies on the accused to prove his defence of justification or truth. In criminal cases however truth of the statements alleged to be defamatory is only a defence when the truth has come out for public good. In India, this law is enacted In Indian Penal Code . Exception 1 to Sec.499 of the Indian Penal Code is culled out above says it is not defamation to impute anything which is true concerning any person, if it be for public good that the imputation should be made or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact. 29. The burden of proving that the words alleged to be defamatory are true is on the accused, and the burden of proof on this point is not shifted nor does the presumption of good conduct cease to be available in 33 Spl.CC 461/2018 favour of the Complainant in consequence of his having given evidence on this behalf. In the cases of criminal defamation, the accused has not only to justify the whole of his libel but the plea taken has to be proved as strictly as if the complainant was being prosecuted for the offence. 30. The wide general principle which underlies the defence of privilege is the common convenience and welfare of society. The difference between absolute privilege and qualified privilege lies in the fact that whereas the one affords complete immunity the other can be destroyed by proof of malice on the part of the accused. This defence of absolute privilege and qualified privilege have been well settled that sort of privilege is dictated by public interests, but the welfare of society cannot leave the matter at that; it must have other occasions where a person can speak out his mind freely and without fear of any sort of action, although the statements made are defamatory in their nature. 31. Unlike civil law on the subject, the criminal law of defamation is a codified law and is contained in Sections 34 Spl.CC 461/2018 499 of IPC . For the offence of defamation who is the person aggrieved may be some time difficult to judge. Here in this case, allegations are made against the Complainant. Sec.198 of Cr.P.C., speaks initiation of procedure for filing of complaint on behalf of the person mentioned in the section. The proviso to Sec.198 of Cr.P.C., provides that some other person with the leave of the court concerned, can make a complaint on his or her behalf. 32. Keeping the aforesaid principles in mind, let me analyse the evidence being spoken to by the Complainant and accused to ascertain as to whether such words being used by the accused are per se defamatory or otherwise. 33. At the cost of repetition, it is just and proper to incorporate the gist of the allegations made against the Complainant by the accused wherein the accused has specifically alleged that the words being used are per se defamatory. ಸಕರರಕಕ ಮಶಸ, ವಕಚನ, ದಜಟಶಹ, ಪತರತರ, ಸರಳರ ಳ ದಖಲಗಳನರ ಟ ಸಕರರ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಕಬಳಕ, ನ ಕಜಟರ 35 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಅಕ ಕಮ ಸಸಧಶನ ಪಡದರರವದರ, ಸಸಜನ ಪಕಪತ, ಅಧಕರ ದರಬರಳಕ, ಒಳಸಕಚರ, ಷಡಡಕತ ಕ ಮಡ ಭ ಟಷಟಚರದಲ ಮರಳರಗರರವದರ, ಸರಳನ ಸರಮಲಯಲ ಮರಳರಗರರವದರ, ನಕ ಮಕಜಜರತ ಇಲಲದಶ ಕಟಟಡಗಳ ನಮರಣ ಮಡರರವದರ, ಅನರದನ ದರರರಪಯತಶಗ, ತಪಸ ಮಹತ ನಶಡರವ ವಡಕತ, ಚರ ಸಸರ ಆಸತ ಘಜಶಷಣ ಸತಡವಗಲಲ, ಲಜಶಕಯರಕತಕಕ ಆಸತ ಘಜಶಷಣ ಮಡಲಲ, ಶಸಕ ಸಸನಕಕ ಅಪಮನ, ಅಸಮಥರ ಅಯತಶಗಡ ವಡಕತ, ಸಕರರ ಆತಸಯನರ ನ ಸಸಕತ ಆಸತಯನನಗ ಮಡರರವದರ, ನಜಶಕದಣಯಲಲದಶ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಶಲ ನಡಸರತತರರವದರ ಇತಡದ., 34. PW1 being the Complainant has reiterated the complaint averments in his evidence on oath. In support of his submission, he relied upon Ex.P. 1 to 61. Throughout his evidence he asserts that the words being used by the accused in series of letters are per se defamatory. He defends his action of getting land being granted by the Government for the purpose of welfare of Ganiga community being the backward community. He says in his 36 Spl.CC 461/2018 evidence that for the purpose of development and welbeing of Ganiga community and also to provide education to the poor children, he got the land granted in Sy.No.112 measuring 10 acres of land in Nagararu village, Dasanapura Hobli, Bengaluru North Taluk. Subsequently, as per the orders dated 21.07.2015 the government has restricted the grant of land to the extent of 08 acres. He further says that he also obtained permission from Nelamangala Development Authority for putting up construction of community hall, hostel for the students, Guru Peeta etc. On 19.01.2013 said Authority has granted permission to put up construction. He further states that, he has deposited Rs.18,07,600/- to the Government. He also obtained permission from Dasanapura Grama Panchayath for sanction plan and deposited Rs.1,40,089/-. After completion of construction, the inauguration was scheduled on 3.7.2016. But he states that because of the letter being addressed by the accused to the Deputy Commissioner and others, alleging that the said construction is illegal, grant is illegal, etc., and hence, 37 Spl.CC 461/2018 because of this false allegation the Chief Minister did not attend the inaugural function. He specifically states that, before that this accused demanded to pay Rs.2 lakh from the Complainant. As the Complainant refused to pay same, the accused did all these tactics and did all false and unfounded allegations. It is further stated by the Complainant that, accused did not stop. He moved the Land Grabbing Court by making false allegations on 5.11.2016. The Land Grabbing Court conducted enquiry and dismissed the complaint of the accused. The accused also moved various authorities like Tahasildar, Bengaluru North Taluk, Anti Corruption Bureau, etc., but all the while he failed in his attempt. He has done all false and unbounded allegations against the Complainant. Even, accused went to the print and electronic media and did false allegations against the Complainant alleging that the Complainant has committed fraud on the government for his personal gain, etc. 35. According to the Complainant, the allegations made by the accused are per se defamatory. This PW1 has 38 Spl.CC 461/2018 been intensively cross-examined. It is suggested to pW1 that the said Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust came in existence in the year 2010. PW1 admits the same. This PW1 states that, it is not family Trust. This Trust belongs to Ganiga community and also sub-cast of Ganiga community. A Trust deed is pressed into service by putting so many questions in the cross-examination. Accused confronted Ex.D. 1 to the Complainant i.e., Trust Deed being registered in the name of Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust. He questions the very contents of the Trust Deed by putting so many questions in the cross-examination. Accused himself initially cross examined this PW1. It is suggested to PW1 that, this Complainant has deposed before the court that, he has not encroached upon the Government land. This suggestion is denied. When the suggestions are denied, they have no evidentiary value. So far as grant of sy.no.112 measuring 10 acres initially is admitted. So also it is admitted that subsequently, said grant was reduced to 08 acres of land in sy.no.112 of Nagaruru village. According to the accused, this very grant 39 Spl.CC 461/2018 is being illegal and there is violation of Karnataka Land Grant Rules by the Government. He questions said grant itself before the Land Grabbing Court, before the ACB, before the Tahasildar, etc. He has not approached the competent authority seeking cancellation of the said grant. Till date said grant of 08 acres of land in favour of said Trust is not set aside by any competent authorities. This accused has moved before various authorities making so many allegations against the Complainant. Even he says that without the permission of Education Department, Complainant has started school and though he has obtained permission to commence the school, he has not commenced, etc. It is elicited from the mouth of this PW1 in the cross-examination dated 6.6.2019 as under:- "«±Àé UÁtôUÀgÀ ¸ÀAWÉÌ ¥ÀqÉzÀÄPÉÆAqÀ ¸ÀPÁðgÀzÀ C£ÀÄzÁ£ÀªÀ£Àß AiÀiÁªÀ AiÀiÁªÀ PÁªÀÄUÁjUÀ½UÉ G¥ÀAiÉÆÃV¸À¯ÁVzÉ ªÀÄvÀÄÛ ¸ÀPÁðgÀ¢AzÀ §AzÀ C£ÀÄzÁ£ÀªÀ£Àß ¸ÀªÀÄ¥ÀðPÀªÁV £ÀªÀÄä ¸ÀAWÀ §¼À¹PÉÆArzÉ. AiÀiÁªÀ AiÀiÁªÀ PÁªÀÄUÁjUÀ½UÉ C£ÀÄzÁ£ÀªÀ£Àß §¼À¸À¯ÁVzÉ JA§ §UÉÎ £À£ÀUÉ ¤RgÀªÁV ºÉÃ¼À®Ä §gÀÄªÀÅ¢®è. DzÀgÉ C£ÀÄzÁ£ÀªÀ£Àß 40 Spl.CC 461/2018 ºÁ¸ÉÖ¯ï PÀlÖ®Ä UÀÄgÀÄ ¦ÃoÀªÀ£Àß PÀlÖ®Ä ªÀÄvÀÄÛ ¸ªÀÄÄzÁAiÀÄ ¨ÀsªÀ£À PÀlÖ®Ä G¥ÀAiÉÆÃV¸À¯ÁVzÉ." 36. There is no further denial of this evidence by the accused in the further cross-examination. This PW1 states that whatever the grant is granted by the Government, have been utilized properly. It is suggested to PW1 that, in Ganiga Community there are so many societies and by politically influencing he has got the land being granted and misused the same for his personal gain. Even it is suggested to PW1 in the cross-examination at Page No.16 as under:- "£À£Àß gÁdQÃAiÀÄ ¥Àæ¨sÁªÀ¢AzÀ DgÉÆÃ¦ ¸À°è¹zÀ J¯Áè ¦gÁå¢UÀ¼ÀÄ CfðUÀ¼ÀÄ J¯Áè ¥Áæ¢üPÁgÀUÀ¼À°è vÀªÀÄä PÀZÉÃjUÀ¼À°è wgÀ¸ÀÌ ø vÀ DUÀÄªÀAvÉ ªÀiÁrzÉÝÃ£É C£ÀÄßªÀÅzÀÄ ¸ÀjAiÀÄ®è." 37. One thing is clear from this suggestion that all the petitions or complaints being filed by the accused have been rejected by the authorities concerned. 41 Spl.CC 461/2018 38. Complainant has examined four witnesses in support of his case by name Ramalingappa, Sidda Raju, Srinivas Raju and P.Thippeswamy. All these witnesses have come before the court and deposed that they witnessed the telecast being telecasted in Public TV about the alleged illegality committed by the Complainant and they had doubt about the honesty and integrity of the Complainant. These witnesses have been cross-examined by the accused. On perusal of the cross-examination directed to these witnesses, it can very well be stated that, these witnesses have withstood the test of cross-examination. Through out their evidence they say about the conduct of the Complainant in the society and his political career and so also the other welfare activities being done by the Complainant for the welfare of the ganiga community. It is not the case of the accused that these witnesses have come before the court to help the Complainant. According to the suggestions though the Complainant has not done any work, but they are supporting the Complainant. But this suggestion is denied by all the witnesses. So these 42 Spl.CC 461/2018 witnesses support the case of the Complainant stating that this Complainant has got a very name and fame in the Ganiga community in particular and in public in general. 39. So far as documentary evidence produced by the Complainant is concerned, he has produced Ex.P. 1 the proceedings of Government of Karnataka granting him 10 acres of land. This Ex.P. 1 shows about the grant of 10 acres of land of Nagaruru village in the name of Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust. 40. Ex.P. 3 is the complaint being filed by the Complainant before the Superintendent of police, ACB, Bengaluru City making so many allegations against the Complainant about the got granted the land illegally. 41. Ex.P. 4 is the report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, ACB dated 18.7.2016 wherein on enquiry it was revealed that the allegations made by accused are false. Said report of the DSP of ACB is as under:- 43 Spl.CC 461/2018 " ವಚರಣ ವರದದ ಅಜರದರರರ ನಶಡದ ದಜರನಲ ಅಜರದರರರ ಈ ಮಶಲ ನಮಜದಸದ ಅಕಶಗಳ ಕರರತಗ ವಚರಣ ಕಡಗಜಕಡರ ಸಕಬಕಧಸದ ಇಲಖಗಳಕದ ಕಗದ ಪತ ಕಗಳನರ ನ ಪಡದರ ಪರಶಶಲಸಲಗ ಸ,ಚವ ಸಕಪಟದ ಟಪಸಣ ಸಕಖಡ ಆರ.ಡ-367-ಎಲ.ಜ.ಬ.2011. ವಷಯದಸದ445-2011. ದನಕಕದ15-09-2011 ರ ಪ ಟಕರ ಬಕಗಳಜರರ ಉತತರ ತಲಜ ಲ ಕರ, ದಸನಪರ ಹಜಶಬಳ, ನಗರಜರರ ಗಟಮದ ಸವರ ನಕ.112 ರಲನ 10.00 ಎಕರ ಜಮಶನನರ ನ ಕನರಟಕ ಭಜ ಕಕದಯ ನಯಮಗಳರ 1966 ರ ನಯಮ 97(4)ರ ಅಡಯಲನ ಅವಕಶದಕತ ಗಜಶಮಳ ಶಟಶಷರಕಯಕದ ತಗಗಸ, ಸದರ 10 ಎಕರ ಜಮಶನನರ ನ ಕನರಟಕ ಭಜ ಮಕಜಜರತ ನಯಮಗಳರ 1969 ರ ನಯಮ 19(1)(ಎ)ರ ಅನಸಯ ಶಡಕಣಕ ಉದಶಕಕಗ ವಶಸ ಗಣಗರ ಸಮರದಯ ಟ ಟಸ‍ಟ ರವರಗ ಸದರ ನಯಮವಳಗಳ ನಯಮ 19(5)(1) ಅನರ ನ ಸಡಲಸ ನಯಮ 19(3) ರನಸಯ 30 ವಷರಗಳ ಅವಧಗ ವಷರಕವಗ ಎಕರ ಒಕದಕಕ ರಜ.1000- ನಕತ ಗರತತಗ ದರವನರ ನ ಪ ಟಚಲತ ಮರರಕಟಟ ದರದ ಶಶ 10 ರಷರ ಟ ಹಚಚಸರವ ಷರತತಗಜಳಪಟರ ಟ ಗರತತಗ ಆಧರದ ಮಶಲ ಮಕಜಜರರ ಮಡಲರ ಸ,ವ ಸಕಪಟವ ನಣರಯ ತಗದರಕಜಕಡದರಲ , ಈ ನಣರಯಕಕ ಆಗನ ಮರಖಡಮಕತಟಗಳದ ಶಟಶ ಡ.ವ.ಸದನಕದಗಡರವರ ಸಹ ಮಡದರ ಲ ಇದ. ಅದಶ ರಶತ ಹಣ ಬಡರಗಡ ಮಡರವ ಪವರದಲ ಪ ಟತ ಹಕತದಲಯಜ ಸಹ ಹಕದರಳದ ವಗರಗಳ ಕಲಡ ಣ ಇಲಖಯ ಆಯರಕತಕರರ ಸಕರರದಕದ ಮಗರದಶರನ ಪಡದದರ ಲ , ಸಕರರದ ಆದಶಶವದ ಬಳಕವಶ ಹಣ ಬಡರಗಡಗ ಜಲ ಲ ಧಕರಗಳರ, ಬಕಗಳಜರರ ಜಲ ಇವರ ಪ.ಡ.ಖತಯಲರರವ ಹಣವನರ ನ ನಮರಸ ಕಶಕದಟಕಕ ಬಡರಗಡ ಮಡಲರ ಸಜಚಸದರ ಲ , ಪತ ಕವಡವಹರದಕದ ಕಕಡರಬಕದರರತತದ. ಇಲಯವರಗ ಮಡದ ವಚರಣಯಕದ ಅಜರದರರರ ತಮ ಟ ‍ 1988 ವಡಪಟಗ ತ ದಜಡನಲ ನಶಡದ ಅಕಶಗಳರ ಪ.ಸ ಆಕ ಬರದಶ ಇದಲ ಪ ಟಯರಕತ , ಈ ದಜರರ ಅಜರಯನರ ನ ಮರಕತಯಗಜಳಸಲರ ಅನರಮತ ಕಜಶರದ." 44 Spl.CC 461/2018 42. Ex.P.5 is the endorsement issued by the Police to the accused stating that his complaint has been closed. 43. Ex.P.2 is the orders being the Karnataka Prohibition of Land Grabbing Court dated 20.4.2017. Based upon the complaint of accused, it was enquired by the said court and has observed that though the complaint filed the complaint, he has not appeared before the said court and based upon the statement of the Complainant and perusal of the documents, the Land Grabbing Court has come to the conclusion that the allegations made by the accused with regarding grant of land by the Government to the Complainant is false. Accused to substantiate his allegations made before the Land Grabbing Court has not appeared. If the allegations of the accused against the complainant were to be true, nothing prevented him to appear. This conduct of the accused shows that simply he has filed complaint making unfounded allegations. It is recited in the course of the order as under as under:- 45 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಆರಜಶಪ ವಶಸ ಗಣಗರ ಸಮರದಯದ ಅಧಡಕರಗ ಹಗಜ ಮಡನಶಜಕಗ‍ ಟ ಟಸಟರಗ ತಮತ ಸಕಸಸಗ ಕಜಟಟ ಸಕರರ ಭಜಮಯಲ ಪಟಧಕರದ ಷರತತನನಗಲಶ, ಅನರಮಶದತ ನಕಯನನಗಲಶ ಉಲಲಕಫಸದರಯಶ ಎಕಬ ಪ ಟಶನಯರ ನಮತ ಮರಕದ ಉದದವಸರವದಲಲ. ಇಕತಹ ಪ ಟಶನಯನರ ನ ತಶಮರನಸಲರ ಬಶರಯಶ ಪಟಧಕರಗಳರ ಇರರತತವ. ಮರಖಡ ಪ ಟಶನ , ಆರಜಶಪ ಹಶಳದಕತ ಈ ಖಲ ಜಗವನರ ನ ರಕಸಲರ ತವ ತಕತ ಬಶಲಯನರ ನ ಹಕ ಉಳಸಕಜಳಳಲಗದ, ಇದರ ಹಕದ ರವದಶ ದರರರದಶವಲಲ, 18 ಮಶಟರ ‍ ನ 24 ಮಶಟರ ವಸತರಸರವ ರಸತ ಯನರ ಸಮಯದಲ ತಕತ ಬಶಲಯನರ ನ ತಗದರ ರಸತ ನಮರಣಕಕ ತಜಕದರ ಇಲಲದಕತ ಖಲ ಮಡರವದಗ ಹಶಳರತತರ. ಅದರ ಅಲಲದಶ ಈ ಜಗವನರ ನ ಖಲ ಬಟಟರ ಬಶರಯವರರ ದರರರಪಯಗ ನ ವಡಕತಪಡಸರತತರ. ಪಡಸಕಜಳಳಬಹರದರ ಎಕಬ ಅನರಮನವನರ ಈ ಲ ಎಕದರ ರವದಶ ಸಕಡ ನಮ ಆರಜಶಪಯ ಹಶಳಕ ದರರರದಶದರ ತ ಮರಕದ ಕಕಡರಬರದಶ ಇರರವದರಕದ ಒಪಸಕಜಳಳಬಶಕಗರತತದ. ಇದರಕದ ಉದಶ ಪವರಕವಗ 60 ಅಡ ರಸತ ಮತರತ 80 ಅಡ ರಸತ ನಡರವ ಇರರವ 20 ಅಡ ಹಗಜ 425 ಅಡ ಜಗವನರ ನ ರವಗ ಬಶಕದರಜ ತರವಗಜಳಸರತತಶನ ಎಕದರ ಸಹ ಹಶಳರತತರ. ಆದಲರಕದ ನಮತ ಅಭಪಒತಟಯದಲ ಮಶಲಜನಶಟಕಕ ಆರಜಶಪಯರ ಅಕ ಕಮವಗ ಭಜ ಕಬಳಕ ಮಡ ಕಲಕ 4(3) - ರಡ ತಪಸತಸಸರರ ಎಕದರ ಕಕಡರ ಬರರವದಲಲ. ಅವರಗ ಭಜ ಕಬಳಕ ಮನಸಸತ ಇತರತ ಎಕಬರದನರ ನ ತಜಶರಸಲರ ಆ ಜಗದಲ ರವದಶ ಕಟಟಡವನನಗಲಶ ಅಥವ ಇತರಶ ಕಯರಗಳನರ ನ ಪಟರಕಭ ಮಡರರವದಗಲಶ ತಹಸಶಲ ಲ ರ ರವರ ವರದಯಲ ಕಕಡರ 46 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಬರರವದಲಲ, ಅದನರ ನ ನಶರವಗ ಪರರದರದರರರ ಕಜಡ ದಜರಲಲ. ಆದಲರಕದ ಈ ಪರರದರ ಊಜರತವಗತಕಕದಲಲ. 44. Relying upon the this document, counsel for the accused submits that before passing the order, a direction was given to the Complainant to remove the encroachment. Therefore, accused is justified in his say that this Complainant encroached the Government land. But the observations so did by the said Land Grabbing Court is otherwise. So, one thing is clear from Ex.P.2 that there is no land grabbing by the Complainant as alleged by the accused. 45. Revision petition being filed by the accused before Land Grabbing Court also has been dismissed. Ex.P.6 is the complaint being submitted by the accused before the Prl. Secretary, Revenue Department, M.S.Buliding, Bengaluru bringing to the notice of the Prl. Secretary about the alleged land grabbing by the accused. In the course of the said petition, this accused has stated in last para as under:- 47 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಆದಲರಕದ ಹಕದನ ದಜರರಗಳಲ ಉಲಖಸರರವಕತ ಸವರಜನಕರ ತರಗ ಹಣದ ದರಬಳಕಯ ಜಜತಗ ಸವರಜನಕ ರಸತ ಕಬಳಸ, ನಲಯನರ ನ ಮರಚಚ, ಗಜಶಮಳ ಕಭಳಸ, ಸಕರರಕಕ ಮತಶಸ ವಕಚನ ಮಡದ ಶಸಕರದ ಬ.ಜ ಪಟಟಸಸಮಯವರ ಮಶಲ ಕ ಟಮನಲ‍ ದಜರರ ದಖಲಸಬಶಕರ ಮತರತ ಅವರ ಈ ಅಕ ಕಮಗಳಗಲಲ ಕರಣರದ ಎಲಲ ಅಧಕರಗಳ ಮಶಲ ಕನಜನರ ಕ ಕಮ ಕಡಗಜಕಡರ, ಗಟಮ ಮತರತ ರಜಡದ ಜನತಗ ನಡಯ ಒದಗಸಬಶಕಕದರ ಈ ಮಜಲಕ ಪಟಥರನ. ತವ ತರತರರ ಕ ಕಮ ಕಡಗಜಳಳದ ವಳಕಬದ ತಕತ ಕದ ಮಜಲಕ ಪರಜಶಕವಗ ಸಹಕರಸದಲ, ತವ ಈ ಅಕ ಕಮದಲ ಭಗಯಕದರ ತಳದರ ನಡರಲಯದ ಮರ ಹಜಶಗಬಶಕಗರತತದ ಎಕಬ ಅಕಶ ತಮತ ಗಮನಕಕ ತರರತತ ಅದಕಕ ಅವಕಶ ಕಜಡದ ಸಜಕ ಕ ಕಮ ವಹಸಲರ ಮತಜತಮತ ಈ ಮಜಲಕ ಮನವ. 46. So by stating so many things in the complaint, even accused has cautioned the said Prl. Secretary that if no action is taken against the Complainant, then it has to be inferred that this Prl. Secretary is involved in the commission of crime by the Complainant. Placing reliance upon this contents, it is submitted by the counsel for the 48 Spl.CC 461/2018 Complainant that even this accused is trying to black mail the Prl. Secretary of the Revenue Department. 47. On perusal of this Ex.P.6, the accused has made so many allegations against the Complainant and even he has cautioned the Prl. Secretary of Revenue Department stating that if no action is taken, it is to be inferred that this Prl Secretary is involved. Such a conduct is not expected from the accused. 48. Ex.P.7 is another letter addressed to Tahasildar, Nelamangala stating that the Complainant has purchased sy.No.183 measuring 02A 14 G of Jakkanahalli village and he requested the Tahasildar not to effect any mutation. It is independent personal land being purchased by the Complainant. Even then this accused wants that the Revenue authorities shall not effect the mutation in the name of Complainant . But his prayer was negatived after hearing the Complainant. Ex.P.8 is the orders being passed by the Tahasildar upon the complaint filed by the accused as per Ex.P. 7, wherein it is stated though the accused was called for five times, he has not appeared. Based upon the 49 Spl.CC 461/2018 documents produced, allegations made against the Complainant was negatived and mutation entry was made in the name of the Complainant in respect of aforesaid Sy.No.183 measuring 02 acre 14 guntas of Jakkanahalli village. 49. Ex.P.9 is another letter addressed by the accused to the police dt.6.10.2017 alleging that there is encroachment of the government of land and that has to be removed by invoking the provisions of Sec.192(a)and (b) of Karnataka Land Revenue Act . But no action is taken on this. 50. Ex.P. 10 is the paper publication appeared in Mirror News Paper on 11.6.2016 wherein the allegations made by the accused with regard to the land grabbing etc. Even the say of the Complainant is printed in this Ex.P. 10. 51. Ex.P. 11 is the order sheet being maintained by the Land Grabing Court, based upon the Complaint of the accused, which shows that, the accused i.e., present complainant has complied the directions of the said court. 50 Spl.CC 461/2018 Though the accused did the review petition to review the order passed by the said court, the revision petition has been dismissed by the Land Grabbing Court as stated above. Ex.P. 11 evidences the said fact of dismissal of Revision Petition. 52. Ex.P. 12 is the letter addressed to the Presiding Officer of Land Grabbing Court bringing to the notice of the court about the threat being given etc. 53. Ex.P. 13 is the CD containing the conversation between Public TV Anchor and the accused. Ex.p.13(a) is the contents of the said conversation. In the interview in the Public TV this accused has stated about the alleged illegal activities did by the Complainant and even he says that there was threat by the Complainant etc. 54. Ex.P. 13(b) is the certificate U/s.65(b) of Indian Evidence Act stating that the contents of the CD are correct. Relying upon the contents of the CD, it is stated by the Complainant that, even this accused has not stopped his alleged activities and went before the print and 51 Spl.CC 461/2018 electronic media, did false allegations against the Complainant. While marking this Ex.p. 13, Ex.P. 13(a) and (b), no little finger is raised by the accused. 55. Ex.P-14 is another letter addressed by the accused to the Land Grabbing Curt about encroaching the Government Land by putting fence by the Complainant. 56. Ex.P-15 is another letter addressed to M.T.Nanaiah, Advocates by the accused. 57. All these allegations made by the accused have been negatived by the Land Grabbing Court. It is not the case of the accused that he has preferred any appeal or revision before the competent Appellate Court on the orders passed by the Land Grabbing Court. 58. Ex.P-16 is the proceedings passed by the Joint Director of Town and Country Planning while granting permission to put up construction directing the Complainant to follow certain terms and conditions. 59. Ex.P-17 is sketch annexed to the said permission. 52 Spl.CC 461/2018 60. Ex.P-18 is the letter addressed by the accused to the Deputy Commissioner, Bengaluru Urban District bringing to the notice of the DC about the alleged illegal activities by the Complainant in encroaching the Government land. 61. Ex.P-19 is the letter addressed by the accused to the Deputy Commissioner again on 29.11.2016. All these letters have been considered by the authorities concerned and the claim of the accused has been denied. 62. Ex.P-20 is the report submitted by the Tahasildar, Bengaluru North Taluk to the Deputy Commissioner stating that there is no encroachment did by the complainant and it is left as it is. This document is not disputed by the accused. 63. Ex.P-21 is another letter addressed by the Tahasildar, to Assistant Commissioner, Bengaluru North Taluk stating that, there is no encroachment of path way or the road in an extent of 0.04.08 guntas. It is the say of the accused that all these officers are won over by the 53 Spl.CC 461/2018 Complainant and therefore, these authorities have rejected the claim of the accused. If really the Complainant has won over all these authorities concerned, nothing prevented the accused to prefer appeal before competent court. But he has not done so. Thus the claim of the accused that the Complainant has influenced all these authorities and won over them has no evidentiary value. 64. In Ex.P. 32 being the report of the Tahasildar of Bengaluru North Taluk. Though it is alleged by the accused that there was an encroachment, but it is reported by the Tahasildar that, there is no encroachment as such and the path way is being used. This report of the Tahasildar, Bengaluru North Tq., discloses that the allegations of the accused against the Complainant stating that he has encroached the pathway and put up construction is false. 65. Though it is alleged that Complainant has used his influence and got rejected all the representations of the accused. But nothing prevented the accused to challenge the said report or the orders being passed by the 54 Spl.CC 461/2018 Tahasildar, Bengaluru North Tq., before appropriate authority. 66. Ex.P. 22 is the letter being addressed by the Director of Land Records to the Tahasildar with sketch. It is stated in the sketch that fencing wall is within the area being granted to the Vishwa Ganigara Sangha. 67. Ex.P. 23 is another representation being the submitted by the accused to the Judge of the Land Grabbing Court dated 12.9.2017. It is stated that the Complainant has given threat to him, therefore he wants police protection. 68. Ex.P. 24 is letter being addressed by the Complainant to the Land Grabbing Court wherein it is stated that within the boundaries of the land being granted as per the orders being passed by the Land Grabbing Court, the fencing have been done. 69. Ex.P. 25 is another letter addressed to the Land Grabbing Court by the Complainant showing the compliance of the orders passed by the said court. While 55 Spl.CC 461/2018 marking these documents, accused has not raised any objections. 70. Ex.P. 26 is the list of the documents being produced before the Land Grabbing court. 71. Ex.P. 27 is the orders of the Tahasildar stating that there is no encroachment being done by the Complainant Trust. 72. Ex.P. 28 is the order sheet of Land Grabbing Court and final order so passed show that, claim of the accused is rejected. 73. Ex.P. 29 is another representation of the accused addressed to the Commissioner of BBMP bringing to the notice of the Commissioner about the alleged illegal activities of the Complainant. 74. Ex.P. 30 is the similar letter addressed to the Deputy Commissioner of Bengaluru Urban District. Ex.P. 31 is the letter addressed by the Police Inspector, Madanayakanahalli police station to the Complainant to 56 Spl.CC 461/2018 appear before the police and give explanation with regard to the complaint filed by the accused. 75. Ex.P. 32 is the letter addressed by the accused to the Halasoor gate Police station alleging the encroachment of the government land by the Complainant. 76. Ex.P. 33 is another letter addressed to the Inspector General of Police alleging similar allegations by the accused. 77. Ex.P. 34 is the letter issued by the Madanayakanahalli police station to the Complainant calling upon him to appear before police station within two days and to give explanation. 78. Likewise, this accused has submitted so many representations before various authorities, but not succeeded. 79. Ex.P. 35 is the endorsement issued by the Superintendent of Police, Bengaluru District. 57 Spl.CC 461/2018 80. Ex.P. 36 is the letter addressed to the Superintendent of Police, Bengaluru District by the accused. 81. Likewise, we find Ex.P. 37 to 46 where in it is noticed that all the attempts of the accused have been failed and all his representations/allegations have been negatived by the authorities concerned. 82. It is the case of the Complainant, that this accused gave threat to him and tried to black mail him stating that this Complainant has to give Rs.2 lakhs to him, otherwise he will bring to the notice of public at large about the illegal activities of the Complainant. According to the Complainant he has not violated any provisions of Karnataka Land Revenue Act or the Land Grant Rules. He has followed all the procedures of Land Grant etc., and as there was extortion or threat given by the accused. Therefore, he lodged complaint before Madanayakanahalli Police which is registered in Cr.No.314/2018 for the offences U/s.384 of IPC . To that effect, copy of the charge sheet is produced. 58 Spl.CC 461/2018 83. It is not disputed that, this accused is facing trial before the JMFC, Nelamangala for the aforesaid offence. 84. Ex.P. 48 and 49 are the documents being produced by the Complainant to show that, under the Land Grant Rules and as demanded by the Nelamangala Development Authority, he has deposited Rs.18,07,600/- and Rs.1,20,000/- to the said Nelamangala Planning Authority as well as Dasanapura Grama Panchyath to get the permission to put up construction in the property so granted, so also permission from Dasanapura Grama Panchayath. While marking these documents, no little finger is raised by the accused. So these two documents prove that the Complainant has deposited requisite amount before the Nelamangala Planning Authority and Dasanapura Grama Panchayath. 85. Ex.P. 50 is the letter addressed to the Complainant from the office of the Accountant General with regard to audit enquiry. According to the Complainant 59 Spl.CC 461/2018 he has followed all the procedures to put up the construction in the land so granted. 86. Ex.P. 51 is the sketch showing the situation of Sy.No.112 being granted to Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust, wherein extent of the land being granted, so also the situation of the various buildings like Kalyana Mantapa, temple, building, shed etc., leaving the said road is also shown in this Ex.P. 51. 87. Ex.P.52 is the copy of the FIR being issued by Madanayakanahalli Police station based on the complaint being filed by the Complainant. Ex.P.53 is the copy of the charge sheet. 88. Ex.P. 54 is the copy of the RTC wherein we find that the land bearing Sy.No.112 is Government Gomala Land and 08 acres of land was granted to Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust. 89. Likewise we find the other documents produced by the Complainant to show that he has followed all the norms of spending the government grant as per Ex.P. 56 to 60 Spl.CC 461/2018 60. While marking these documents also no objections are raised by the accused. 90. Ex.P. 61 is the list containing various documents with regard to the activities being done by the Complainant as a politician at various capacities. These documents if read, show that this Complainant has participated in various political activities and he worked as Minister and he has done so many social service as a politician. 91. According to the counsel for the Complainant, documents reflect the very position of the Complainant as a honest politician and he has maintained intigrity throughout his political career. 92. On perusal of the documents produced by the Complainant and also the evidence spoken to by the Complainant it shows that the Complainant is a social worker and he has done so many social service and participated in political activities both as a citizen as well as a politician and Minister in the Government of Karnataka. 61 Spl.CC 461/2018 93. Accused in this case, examined himself as DW1. He specifically states in his evidence that, because of his intervention he could save landed property of the government worth Rs.150 crores and he has helped so to the District authorities in the Government. When he was doing such social activity, he came to know that the Government of Karnataka has reserved a fund of Rs.05 crores to the Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust. This Complainant was MLC at that time and also he was very close to the then Chief Minister. He also worked as Political Secretary of said Chief Minister. At that time, in the government budget Rs.5 crores was reserved for the welfare of Ganiga Community. On 24.3.2011 Complainant established the Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust. In the Trust it is mentioned as Rs.5 crores have been reserved for the benefit of Ganiga community. It is stated that, it is a family Trust and it is shown in the Trust Deed. Thus throughout his examination-in-chief, he states that this Complainant by putting forth false claim to have personal gain of the said amount have created the said 62 Spl.CC 461/2018 Trust and misused the said fund granted by the Government. But this defence of the accused has been refuted by the Complainant in toto. Through his examination-in-chief DW1 says that, the Tahasildar submitted a report that there is no encroachment and accordingly it is a false report. He admits about rejection of his claim before Land Grabbing Court. In support of his claim he relies on Ex.D. 1 to 94. I am going to discuss about the contents of the documents being produced by the accused in subsequent paras. 94. Throughout the examination-in-chief, this DW1 maintain that this Complainant is cheater, misused his profession, did false claim under the guise of benefiting the ganiga community. Did influence on the officers concerned. Got the land granted. He specifically deposes that all the claims of the accused have been rejected, because of the influence being done by the Complainant. 95. This accused states in his cross-examination that he is doing LIC agency to earn his livelihood. He questions about the grant of the Gomala to the Vishwa Ganigara 63 Spl.CC 461/2018 Samudaya Charitable Trust. In the similar gomala land in the year 2004, certain landed property is granted to Adi Chunchanagiri Math. About the grant of land to Adi Chunchanagiri Math, he admits that he has not raised any objections before any competent authority. Even he admits that he has not raised any objections about the encroachment of road by the Adichunchanagiri Math. 96. It is suggested to DW1 that, in the year 2016 he did a demand of Rs.2 lakhs. This suggestion is denied. He admits that a complaint has been filed by the Complainant before the Sanjayanagara Police station in Cr.No.314/2018. He admits the said document as per Ex.P.47. He admits that this Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust is a registered Trust and it has got its own bye-laws. He admits that the Government has granted the amount to put up construction by the said Sangha by utilizing the said grant. He deposed ignorance that the Government has granted money to the various community people towards the respective welfare of different communities. He admits of filing complaint before ACB against Vishwa Ganigara 64 Spl.CC 461/2018 Samudaya Charitable Trust. So also admits regarding filing complaint before various authorities like Land Grabbing Court, Deputy Commissioner, BBMP, etc. According to him, rules have been violated by the Complainant and therefore he has taken steps as an RTI activist. Illegal grant have been made by the Government granting land to the Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust and it is because of the influence done by the Complainant. Throughout his evidence, accused deposes that, the Complainant is a cheater. He has produced so many documents in support of his claim and most of the documents have been obtained by him under the provisions of RTI Act . Some documents show the seal and signature and some are not showing. In Page No.20 of the cross-examination he says that the said Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust has put up the construction of the building leaving aside 80 ft road. He further improves and says that it is done only after passing the orders by the court. He denied the other suggestions. 97. In page No.22 of the cross-examination DW1 states as under:- 65 Spl.CC 461/2018 ಹಗ ಭಜ ಕಬಳಕ ನಡರಲಯದವರ ಆದಶಶದಕತ ಬಕಗಳಜರರ ಉತತರ ತಲಜಕನ ತಹಸಶಲ ಲ ರರರ ದದ27.10.2017 ರಕದರ ನ.ಡ.3 ರಲರರವ ದಖಲತಯಕತ ವಶಸ ಗಣಗ ಸಕಘದವರರ ಸಕರರದ ರವದಶ ಜಮಶನನನ ಒತರತವರ ಮಡಲಲ ಅಕತ ಹಶಳದರ ಎನರ ನ ವದರ ಸರ ಇದ. 98. This admission of DW1 goes a long way. He admits about the filing of writ petition before Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka in W.P.15546 /2019. He admits about facing of a criminal case in a charge sheet filed by Sanjayanagara Police Station, wherein it is alleged by the Complainant that accused demanded to pay Rs.2 lakhs and as he has not paid the complaint was filed. He admits about the filing of the complaint before Deputy Commissioner, Bengaluru stating that the Chief Minister shall not participate in the inaugural function of the building being constructed by said Sangha. He admits that as per Ex.P. 41 Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust is permitted to run the school from 1st to 5th standard. So also as per Ex.P. 42 it was permitted to run English Medium School from 1st to 5th standard. He admits about the issuance of endorsement by the police as per Ex.D. 62. He has deposes 66 Spl.CC 461/2018 ignorance with regard to the taking electric connection, etc. 99. On perusal of the evidence of this DW1, it shows that his defence is justification of his allegations made before various authorities. According to him he has put forth the true facts before the various authorities and the fault is of the Complainant. 100. In support of his defence, accused has relied upon Ex.D. 1 to 94 as stated supra. Ex.D. 1 is Trust Deed being confronted to PW1 during the course of cross- examination. Counsel for the accused relied upon the contents of Ex.D. 1 and 2, wherein it is recited that this complaint would be permanent trustee of Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust and he has got full authorities. Therefore, it is submitted by the counsel for the accused that this Trust is family Trust of the Complainant and no other Trustee has got any rights against this Complainant. So far as creation of Trust by the Complainant in the name of Vishwa Ganigara Samudaya Charitable Trust is concerned, it is admitted. In all there are 13 trustees and 67 Spl.CC 461/2018 certain terms and conditions are incorporated in the Trust Deed. Ex.D-2 is another Trust Deed wherein some corrections have been made to the Trust Deed Ex.D-1. We are not deciding about the validity or invalidity of the said Trust Deed now. It is much argued by the counsel for the accused that these Ex.D-1 and 2 show that the Complainant has mis-used his position as MLC and also as Secretary to Chief-Minister, influenced the revenue authorities and got the land granted in the name of the aforesaid Trust and some allegations are made about mis-use of the funds being granted by the Government. So many allegations have been made by the accused before various authorities, he justifies his action. It has come in his evidence that he is an RTC activist. He much relied upon his own documents being the representation before the various authorities and also the orders being passed by the Tahasildar as per Ex.D. 3(a). It is already being discussed in the above said paras that the Tahasildar has found that there is no encroachment being did by the Trust. Ex.D. 3 and 4 are the evidence to that effect. 68 Spl.CC 461/2018 101. Ex.D. 3 is the letter addressed by the Tahasildar to the Deputy Commissioner, Bengaluru District, wherein it is noticed by the Tahasildar that, there is no encroachment as such. The Government land has been been left as it is. It is his own document. When the revenue authorities have come to the conclusion that, there is no encroachment and there is no illegality did by the Complainant in utilising the land being granted by the Government in the Gomala land, now what made the accused to make these allegations against the Complainant has to be explained by the accused himself. But there is no proper explanation offered by the accused that why such allegations have been made against the Complainant. But he justifies his actions. He also has produced series of documents i.e., sketch prepared by the revenue authorities, order sheet, etc. So also he has produced the orders being passed by the Land Grabbing Court, Bengaluru. I have already discussed about the contents of the orders being passed by the said court in the foregoing paras. The said court has come to the conclusion that there is no encroachment at all. If at all 69 Spl.CC 461/2018 there is any encroachment, which is to be removed by the Complainant. To that effect, Complainant has complied said order and submitted the same before the court. Even the revision petition so filed by the accused have been dismissed by the said court. 102. Ex.D-9 is the photograph showing the putting up of fencing by the said Trust. Ex.D-10 is the endorsement issued by the Tahasildar to the accused obtained under RTI Act . It is alleged by the accused that the Trust has not paid the amount. Therefore, a notice has been issued. But the evidence have been placed on record by the Complainant that he has paid the said amount being demanded by the revenue authorities. Thus series of documents produced by the accused show that he also has produced the similar documents as that of the documents produced by the Complainant. 103. On scrupulous reading of all these documentary evidence right from Ex.D-1 to 91 they do demonstrate that, series of complaints have been filed by the accused 70 Spl.CC 461/2018 making so many allegations against the Complainant. But in all his attempts, he failed. 104. The counsel for the accused has relied upon the provisions of Karnataka Land Grant Rules and according to his submission, no proper procedure have been followed by the revenue authorities in granting the land and by violating the norms to grant the land, these lands have been granted in the name of the aforesaid Trust just to have personal gain. No evidence has been placed by the accused that this Trust have been created by the Complainant for his personal gain. Thus it is hard to believe the story of the accused that his allegations did against the Complainant are really true and he is justified in making such allegations, etc. Various orders have been produced by the accused himself obtained under RTI Act . He himself says that he is an RTI Activist. 105. On scrupulous reading of all the documents, this accused himself has produced documents to show that the Complainant has given his justification of utilizing the funds being granted by the Government for the purpose of 71 Spl.CC 461/2018 putting various constructions in the land that was granted in Sy.No.112 of Nagaruru village. When the Complainant has given such an explanation before the authorities, what made this accused to make such allegations is a mystery. On the guise of status as RTI Activist, he cannot take the advantage of the same. As per the say of the accused, the Complainant has not followed the procedure in establishment of the school etc., so in the appointment of teacher etc. It is for the authorities concerned to take action. No doubt under the provisions of RTI Act this accused being the citizen of India can seek information. He says under the RTI Act he is empowered. 106. The Government of India enacted RTI Act 2005 to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for the citizens to secure access to the information under the control of Public Authorities. The basic objective of the Right to Information Act is to empower the citizens, promote transparency and accountability in the working of the Public Authorities, 72 Spl.CC 461/2018 contain corruption and make our democracy work for the people in real sense. 107. It is true that information is any material in any form. It includes records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, log books, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form. It also includes information relating to any private body which can be accessed by the public authority under any law for the time being in force. 108. Thus the main objective of the RTI Act is to promote transparency and accountability in the working of the Public Authorities and set up a practical regime to giving citizens access to information under the control of Public Authorities. 109. As every coin has two sides, one is useful and the other flipside which is not useful but misused by the people. Same is the case with RTI Act too. As the law does not enquire about the purpose of the information which is 73 Spl.CC 461/2018 shared with the people, which way it is used and what are the purpose of using this information? These are the basic question which one always thinks but beyond this there is something which nobody knows. The purpose behind acquiring the information is not always to dispense the things inform of the administrative machinery to give it speed but sometime it is malaise the department, person of very high stature in the Government organisation. 110. There are numerous instances of Right to Information Act, 2005 , being misused. Here in this case, accused being the RTI Activist filed series of petitions before the various authorities, bring to the notice of various authorities that the Complainant is a cheater, misused his power, influenced authorities, etc. To justify the said act of the accused, some material have to be produced by the accused. All the petitions so submitted by accused have been negatived by various authorities. Thus justification of truth is missing in this case in the defence of accused. Even this accused is having a doubt about the legality of the institution being started by the Complainant 74 Spl.CC 461/2018 and he alleges that for safeguarding the public at large he has moved the authorities concerned. Evidently, this accused is neither the member of Ganiga community, nor the member of any institution, nor his children are studying in the said school. But in his petitions he has disclosed that he is interested in the functioning of the institution being established by the Complainant and there appeared no relationship of the information sought with public activities or interest. Therefore, it is evident that the purpose of obtaining information was to misuse or threaten the institution or the Complainant and for this reason that the defence of the accused has to be rejected. This RTI Act was not enacted for abusing people and seeking personal revenge. According to the accused, several letters/representations to the Government to the authorities concerned as discussed above, but no action was taken against the Complainant holding that there is encroachment by the Complainant and report to that effect have been submitted by the revenue authorities concerned. Land Grabbing Court has rejected the claim of the accused, 75 Spl.CC 461/2018 even he has filed review petition and that also came to be rejected. 111. No doubt, we cannot give any type of clean chit to the Complainant. But the information sought exposes vindictive attitude by the accused. The accused defended himself saying that the Complainant black mailed and filed false complaint against him. But portion of abusive words being used in various letters appears to be unparliamentary and that was reason such questions are raised. So if all this evidence is put together, coupled with the position of law, it can very well be stated that, the accused in this case has not proved his justification of truth. 112. Counsel for the Complainant places reliance on the following judgments:- 1) Subramanian Swamy Vs. Union of India reorted in MANU/SC/0621/2016; AIR 2016 SC 2728 2) Siddarth Sanwaria Vs. P.C.Sanghi in casse No.Crm.M.26519/2015 (O & M) before Punjab and Haryana High Court 76 Spl.CC 461/2018 3) Vijay Jawarlalji Darda and Ors Vs. State of Maharashtra and another dated 4.10.2019 in Crl. Application No.2032 of 2009 4) Sukra Mahto Vs. Basdeo Kumar Mahto and another reported in 1971 AIR 1567 5) Jeffrey J.Diermeier and another Vs. State of West Bengal and another reported in (2010)6 SCC 243 6) Kanwal Lal Vs. State of Punjab reported in 1963 Supp(1) CR 479 7) Sahib Singh Mehra Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh reported in 1965 AIR 1451: 1965 SCR(2) 823 113. I have scrupulously perused the citations being submitted by counsel for the Complainant. They speak with regard to the constitutional validity of the criminal defamation under Sec.499 and 500 of IPC. It is held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the first judgment that the said provision is valid in the eye of law. It is stated in the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Om Prakash Chautala Vs. Kanwar Bhan and others reported in (2014) 5 SCC 417 held as under:- "It has been held that reputation is fundamentally a glorious amalgam and 77 Spl.CC 461/2018 unification of virtues which makes a man feel proud of his ancestry and satisfies him to bequeath it as a part of inheritance on posterity. It is nobility in itself for which a conscientious man would never barter it with all the tea of China or for that matter all the pearls of the sea. The said virtue has both horizontal and vertical qualities. When reputation is hurt, the man is half- dead. It is an honour which deserves to be equally preserved by the downtrodden and the privileged. The aroma of reputation is an excellence which cannot be allowed to be sullied with the passage of time. It is dear to life and on some occasions, it is dearer than life. And that is why it has become an inseparable facet of Article 21 of the Constitution. No one would 78 Spl.CC 461/2018 like to have his reputation dented and it is perceived as an honour rather than popularity." 114. Thus the reputation of a human being is fundamentally glorious amalgam and unification of virtues which makes a man feel proud of his ancestry. Learned counsel submitted that using of such words, as stated supra, has really hurt this Complainant and because of this allegation he is half-dead. The principles laid down in th aforesaid judgments relied upon by the counsel for the Complainant is aptly applies to the facts of the case. 115. As against this submission, counsel for the accused has placed reliance on the judgment of Hon'ble Gujarath High Court in Crl.Misc. Appln No.2546 of 2012 between Sudhir Agarwal Vs. State of Gujarath decided on 5.4.2018. But the facts of this case differs than the facts of the said judgment. Even in the course of the said judgment, Hon'ble Gujarath High Court observed relying upon the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of Ramanbhai 79 Spl.CC 461/2018 Nagjibhai Patel Vs. Jaswantsingh Udesingh Dabhi and others reported in AIR 1968 SC 1162 as under:- "We may state that the charge of bribery is in the nature of a criminal charge and has got to be proved beyond doubt. The standard of proof required is that of proving a criminal or a quasi - criminal charge. A clear-cut evidence, wholly credible and reliable is required to prove the charge beyond doubt. Evidence merely probabilising and endeavouring to prove the fact on the basis of preponderance of probability is not sufficient to establish such a charge." 116. Here in this case also the allegations of bribary, corruption, cheating, influencing officers and getting the 80 Spl.CC 461/2018 land granted by influencing the Chief Minister and other authorities have been alleged by the accused. But these allegations are not proved by the accused. 117. When the counsel for the accused was advancing arguments, he has produced about 14 documents by filing list of documents dt.25.10.2019. These documents are not at all marked in evidence. He places reliance on the Karnataka Land Grant Rules, invitation card of the Complainant institution and other letters being addressed, so also copy of the complaint issued by the Dasanapura Panchayath issued under RTI Act etc. As these documents are not marked in evidence, they cannot be read in evidence. However, it is for the authorities concerned to take action for setting aside the grant, if at all there is any violation. The documents so produced are being obtained by the accused subsequent to filing of this complaint. Some documents are obtained by the accused during the pendency of this complaint. So, no evidentiary value can be attached to these documents. In this case, it is for the Complainant to establish the guilt of the accused 81 Spl.CC 461/2018 beyond all reasonable doubt. Sec.499 of Cr.P.C., speaks of definition of defamation. 118. Thus it is alleged that there is imputation of truth which public good requires to be made or published. But in this case though series of letters addressed, but there is no imputation of truth by the accused against the Complainant. Sec.499 of IPC does not place unreasonable restriction on the freedom of speech and expression and, hence, is not violative of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. Therefore, this Section requires three essentials. 1) making or publishing any imputation concerning any person. 2) such imputation must have been made-- i) by words, either spoken or intended to be read; or ii) by signs or iii) by visible representations. 3) Such imputation must have been made with the intention of harming, or with knowledge or 82 Spl.CC 461/2018 having reason to believe that it will harm the reputation of the person concerning whom it is made. 119. Herein this case a complaint is filed by Complainant alleging defamation made against him by the accused, being a RTI activist and series of complaints have been filed but they have been rejected. Even the accused went to print and electronic media gave statement against the Complainant. Therefore, making known of defamatory matter after it has been written to some person other than the person of whom it is written, is publication in its legal sense. It is proved by the Complainant that to defame the complainant, this publication has been made and series of complaints have been addressed by the accused. A play which is woven out of the imagination of the author i.e., accused, can possibly contain more deadly imputations against the real persons than a mere narrative. Thus to say, this accused has woven out his own imagination about the allegations so made by him against the Complainant. 83 Spl.CC 461/2018 120. No doubt it has come in the evidence of the accused that there is no ill-will against the Complainant. But there is an imputation against the Complainant, although these allegations are made in the absence of actual ill-will, is not on that account to be accepted as being made bonafide. Conscious violation of law to another's prejudice is sufficient, though there may be no malice in fact. The defamatory words being used by the accused in various petitions/letters/complaints, etc., prima facie libellous and were used by the accused in his representations/ complaints etc. 121. The meaning which should be attached to 'harm' is not the ordinary sense in which the word is used.... By 'harm' is meant imputations on a man's character made and expressed to others, so as to lower him in their estimation and that anything which lowers him merely in his own estimation, certainly does not constitute defamation." 122. Thus the essence of offence of defamation is the harm caused to the reputation of a person. Character is 84 Spl.CC 461/2018 what a person actually is and reputation is what neighbours and others say he is. The abusive words used by the accused fulfills the ingredients of Sec.499 of IPC. 123. In Kartar Singh case reported in AIR 1956 SC 541, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India quoted with approval of the passage from the judgment of Cockburn, C.J., in Seymour Vs. Butterworth; reads thus:- "Those who fill a public position must not be too thin skinned in reference to comments made upon them. It would often happen that observations would be made upon public men which they know from the bottom of their hearts were undeserved and unjust; yet they must bear with them and submit to be misunderstood for a time". 124. This principle also can be applied to the present facts of the case made out by the Complainant. Therefore, in the considered view of this court, the Complainant in this case is able to establish beyond all reasonable doubt 85 Spl.CC 461/2018 that the imputations in question stated above consists of words which are made in various petitions concerned the Complainant, emanated from the accused are made published and intended thereby to harm the reputation of the Complainant and hence the Complainant in this case is able to prove the point No.1 raised supra with legal evidence. Hence, I record my findings on the above point in the affirmative holding that the accused is found guilty of committing the offence under Sec.499 read with sect.500 of IPC . 125. Now the question comes with regard to the imposition of sentence. As this case is summons trial case, accused need not be heard on sentence. 126. So far as sentencing policy is concerned, this section says that whoever defames another shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both. 127. Evidently, in this case accused is eking his livelihood as an LIC Agent and he is RTI Activist. There are 86 Spl.CC 461/2018 no mitigating circumstances so as to show any leniency in imposing sentence. 128. In considering the quantum of sentence in a case of defamation a number of factors, such as the type of defamation, the manner in which defamation was made, etc., will have to be taken into consideration. Accused being a RTI activist, wields a very powerful weapon in his hand, as an RTI activist, which can mould the public opinion very easily. Hence, the accused is required to attach more care and caution in publishing or while making allegations by writing applications / lodging complaints, etc., which are likely to harm the reputation and good name of others. It is common knowledge that publishing scandalous articles sometimes get wide publicity and the circulation increases and consequently the income of the journalists also increases. This, therefore calls for a deterrent punishment and a mere sentence of fine in such cases will not at all adequate. For such person to pay the fine is very easy and it would not deter him from publishing again one equally libellous article or submitting 87 Spl.CC 461/2018 representation before various authorities. The accused has not justified in submitting such representations without ascertaining the truthfulness of the same. It has come in the evidence of the PW1 - Complainant that accused demanded Rs.2 lakhs from him and otherwise he threatened to him that he will publish in the news papers or he will fight before respective authorities alleging illegality etc. Thus where the accused has acted in a reckless way and without due care and caution and without making any attempt to find veracity of facts before publishing such representations before various authorities, impugned articles, representations etc., in the considered view of this court a sentence of six months of simple imprisonment and a fine of Rs.25,000/- if levied against the accused would meet the ends of justice. Accordingly, I record my findings on the above point No.1 in the affirmative. 129. Point No.2:- As a result of my foregoing discussion and reasons stated thereon, accused is found guilty of offence under punishable U/s. 499 r/w Sec.500 of 88 Spl.CC 461/2018 IPC . Accordingly, acting under Sec.255(2) of Cr.P.C., I proceed to pass the following:- ORDER Accused is found guilty of offence punishable U/s. 499 r/w 500 of IPC . Accused is sentenced to undergo S.I. for a period of six months and also to pay a fine of Rs.25,000/-. In default of payment of fine amount, accused is further sentenced to undergo S.I. for two months. Out of the fine amount, Rs.20,000/- be paid as compensation to the Complainant as per Sec.357 of Cr.P.C. and remaining Rs.5000/- be deposited to the State. Bail bond of the accused and his surety stands cancelled. Supply free copy of the judgment to the accused. (Dictated to the Judgment Writer, transcribed and typed by him, same is revised and corrected by me and then pronounced in the Open Court on this the 6th day of November, 2019) (RAMACHANDRA D. HUDDAR) LXXXI ACC & SJ, Bengaluru City (CCH-82) (Special Court exclusively to deal with criminal cases related to elected MPs/MLAs in the State of Karnataka) 89 Spl.CC 461/2018 ANNEXURE: Witnesses examined by the Complainant. PW1 B.J.Puttaswamy PW2 Ramalingappa PW3 Sidda Raju PW4 Srinivas Raju PW5 P.Thippeswamy Witnesses examined by the defence/accused. DW1 N.Hanumegowda Documents exhibited by the Complainant. Ex.P.1 Copy of land grant order Ex.P.2 Order of Special Court for Prevention of Land Grabbing Ex.P.3 Copy of complaint lodged before Anti Corruption Bureau Ex.P.4 Order regarding closing of the complaint Ex.P.5 Endorsement issued by Anti Corruption Bureau Ex.P.6 Copy of Complaint lodged before Prl. Secretary of Revenue Department Ex.P.7 Copy of Complaint lodged before Tahasildar, Nelamangala Ex.P.8 order passed by Tahasildar, Nelamangala Ex.P.9 Copy of complaint lodged before BMTF Ex.P.10 Copy of paper publication 90 Spl.CC 461/2018 Ex.P.11 Order passed by Special Court for Prevention of Land Grabbing Committee dismissing the review petition Ex.P.12 Review petition filed by the complainant before Special Court for Prevention of Land Grabbing Committee Ex.P.13 CD regarding advertisement given in Television Ex.P.13(a) Transcript Ex.P. 13(b) Certificate issued under Sec.65(b)(4) of Evidence Act Ex.P.14 Copy of complaint Ex.P.15 Letter dt.18.9.2017 Ex.P.16 Work order Ex.P.17 Sketch Ex.P.18 Letter dt.28.6.2016 Ex.P.19 Copy of application Ex.P. 20 Report Ex.P. 21 Report Ex.P. 22 Sketch Ex.P. 23 Application Ex.P. 24 Letter dated 4.7.2017 Ex.P. 25 Letter dated 30.7.2017 Ex.P. 26 List Ex.P. 27 Report Ex.P. 28 Copy of day-book Ex.P. 29 Application Ex.P. 30 Application Ex.P. 31 Notice 91 Spl.CC 461/2018 Ex.P. 32 Application Ex.P. 33 Application Ex.P. 34 Notice Ex.P. 35 Memorandum Ex.P. 36 Letter Ex.P. 37 Enquiry report Ex.P. 38 Endorsement Ex.P. 39 Notice Ex.P. 40 Application Ex.P. 41 Sanction letter Ex.P. 42 Form - 2 Ex.P. 43 Order Ex.P. 44 Application Ex.P. 45 Reminder letter Ex.P. 46 Letter dt.9.8.2018 Ex.P. 47 FIR Ex.P. 48 Sanction Ex.P. 49 Document Ex.P. 50 Document Ex.P. 51 Sketch Ex.P. 52 FIR Ex.P. 53 Charge sheet Ex.P. 54 RTC Ex.P. 55 CDP plan Ex.P. 56 Form-2 Ex.P. 57 Document Ex.P. 58 Document dt.19.6.2018 92 Spl.CC 461/2018 Ex.P. 59 Document dt.29.4.2016 Ex.P. 60 Guidelines Ex.P. 61 Document Documents exhibited by the defence/accused. - NIL Ex.D. 1 Trust Deed Ex.D. 2 Trust Registration Deed Ex.D. 3 Letter dt.31.8.2016 Ex.D. 4 Letter dt.4.9.2017 Ex.D. 5 Sketch Ex.D. 6 sketch Ex.D. 7 sketch Ex.D. 8 Order Ex.D. 9 Photo Ex.D. 10 Letter dt.30.8.2016 Ex.D. 11 CAG Audit Report Ex.D. 12 Notification Ex.D. 13 Land Grant Order dt.22.9.2011 Ex.D. 14 Letter dt.14.8.2011 Ex.D. 15 Circular dt.27.10.2010 Ex.D. 16 Letter dt.8.8.2016 Ex.D. 17 Letter dt.17.10.2016 Ex.D. 18 Letter dt.1.9.2018 Ex.D. 19 Letter dt.15.11.2018 Ex.D. 20 Letter dt.27.6.2017 Ex.D. 21 Letter dt.26.7.2017 93 Spl.CC 461/2018 Ex.D. 22 Letter dt.31.8.2016 Ex.D. 23 Letter dt.5.1.2018 Ex.D. 24 Letter dt.16.8.2017 Ex.D. 25 Letter dt.5.8.2017 Ex.D. 26 Letter dt.13.10.2017 Ex.D. 27 Letter dt.6.9.2016 Ex.D. 28 Letter dt.13.9.2017 Ex.D. 29 Affidavit dt.20.12.2017 Ex.D. 30 Letter dt.24.11.2017 Ex.D. 31 Copy of application dt.12.9.2017 Ex.D. 32 Letter dt.8.2.2017 Ex.D. 33 Affidavit in LGC No.52/2016 Ex.D. 34 Letter dt.3.8.2016 Ex.D. 35 Letter dt.30.6.2016 Ex.D. 36 Letter dt.30.3.2011 Ex.D. 37 Letter dt.21.7.2011 Ex.D. 38 Letter dt.10.7.2013 Ex.D. 39 mahazar Ex.D. 39(a) Rough sketch Ex.D. 40 Letter dt.27.7.2011 Ex.D. 41 Letter dt.28.7.2011 Ex.D. 42 Copy of order dt.20.9.2011 Ex.D. 43 Copy of order dt.11.11.2012 Ex.D. 44 Letter dt.22.9.2011 Ex.D. 45 Copy of complaint dt.23.9.2011 Ex.D. 46 Copy of complaint Ex.D. 47 Copy of tippani Ex.D. 48 Letter dt.11.11.1994 94 Spl.CC 461/2018 Ex.D. 49 Letter dt.18.7.2016 Ex.D. 50 Letter dt.23.8.2016 Ex.D. 51 Letter dt.12.1.2017 Ex.D. 52 Letter dt.20.7.2016 Ex.D. 53 Letter dt.31.7.2017 Ex.D. 54 Letter dt.16.3.2015 Ex.D. 55 Letter dt.13.6.2017 Ex.D. 56 Letter dt.28.1.2015 Ex.D. 57 Letter dt.10.3.2015 Ex.D. 58 Letter dt.15.5.2016 Ex.D. 59 Letter dt.12.7.2016 Ex.D. 60 Letter dt.10.10.2011 Ex.D. 61 Letter dt.30.10.2013 Ex.D. 62 Copy of letter dt.30-08-2018 & 27-09-2018 Ex.D.63 Letter dt.16-01-2018 Ex.D.64 Letter dt.3-04-2019 Ex.D.65 Letter dt.26-03-2019 Ex.D.66 Letter dt.30-03-2012 Ex.D.67 Letter dt.3-02-2018 Ex.D.68 Letter dt.5-02-2018 Ex.D.69 Letter dt.5-02-2018 Ex.D.70 Commissioner's letter Ex.D.71 Commissioner's letter Ex.D.72 Letter dt.3-11-2014 Ex.D.73 Letter dt.12-08-2016 Ex.D.74 Report copy Dt:20-02-2019 Ex.D.75 Report 95 Spl.CC 461/2018 Ex.D.76 Copy of certificate Ex.D.77 Letter dt.25-09-2018 Ex.D.78 Copy of letter dt.28-08-2018 Ex.D.79 Copy of report Ex.D.80 Letter dt.7-12-2017 Ex.D.81 Letter dt.15-04-2016 Ex.D.82 Letter dt.20-02-2017 Ex.D.83 Tippani and Copy of order Ex.D.84 Letter dt.15-12-2018 Ex.D.85 Letter dt.3-11-2018 Ex.D.86 Letter Dt.13-08-2018 Ex.D.87 Letter dt.18-08-2018 Ex.D.88 Copy of complaint Ex.D.89 Letter dt.3-09-2018 Ex.D.90 Letter dt.20-08-2018 Ex.D.91 Letter dt.20-09-2018 Ex.D.92 Letter dt.31-08-2016 Ex.D.93 Letter dt.30-06-2018 Ex.D.94 Letter dt.6-09-2016 List of Material Objects marked by the prosecution:-- Nil LXXXI ACC & SJ, Bengaluru City (CCH-82) Rrk.