Bindeshwari Singh vs State Of Chhattisgarh on 29 April, 2010 Author: T.P.Sharma Bench: T.P.Sharma HIGH COURT OF CHATTISGARH AT BILASPUR Criminal Appeal 707 of 2004 and Criminal Appeal 737 of 2004 and Criminal Appeal 994 of 2004 and Criminal Appeal 1 Bindeshwari Singh 2 Shashi Bhusan 3 Diwakar 4 Ram Narayan 5 Bandhuram 6 Babulal 7 Chhannuram ...Petitioners Versus State of Chhattisgarh ..Respondents ! V R Tiwari, Abhay Tiwari,Shashi Bhusan,Diwakar and Shailesh ^ Mr Ashish Shukla CORAM: Honble Mr T P SHARMA,Honble Mr R L JHANWAR JJ Dated: 29/04/2010 : JUDGEMENT APPEALS UNDER SECTION 3742 OF THE CODE OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE 1973 The judgment of the Court was delivered by T.P.Sharma, J.:- 1. Criminals Appeal Nos. 758/2004, 707/2004, 737/2004 & 994/2004 filed against the judgment of conviction & order of sentence dated 17.8.2004 passed by the 4th Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.C.), Surajpur, in Sessions Trial No.122/1994 are being disposed of by this common judgment. 2. By filing criminal appeal Nos.758/2004, 707/2004, 737/2004 & 994/2004, the appellants have challenged the legality & propriety of the judgment of conviction & order of sentence dated 17.8.2004 passed by the 4th Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.C.), Surajpur, Sessions Division Surguja in Sessions Trial No.122/1994, whereby & whereunder learned 4th Additional Sessions Judge after holding the appellants guilty for formation of unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapons having its common object to commit culpable homicide amounting to murder of Bijendra and attempt to commit murder, grievous injuries by dangerous weapons, injury by dangerous weapons and in furtherance of common object of unlawful assembly committed murder of Bijendra and fatal injuries to Mangli Bai, Dileshwar, Sohodar Bai, Uday Kumar and Yuvraj convicted the appellants under Sections 148 , 302 / 149 , 307 / 149 , 326 / 149 and 324 / 149 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years, imprisonment for life & to pay fine of Rs.1000/-, in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months, rigorous imprisonment for seven years & to pay fine of Rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for three months, rigorous imprisonment for four years & to pay fine of Rs.500/-, in default of payment of fine to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for three months and rigorous imprisonment for two years. Learned 4th Additional Sessions Judge further convicted appellants Bindeshwari Singh and Chhannu under Section 324 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years. 3. Conviction is impugned on the ground that without there being any clinching and credible evidence for formation of unlawful assembly, presence of all accused and causing injury to complainant party, the Court below has convicted and sentenced the appellants as aforementioned and thereby committed illegality. 4. Case of the prosecution, in brief, is that appellant Bindeshwari was having enmity with the complainant party on account of the land dispute. In the intervening night of 25/26.9.2003 at about 12.30 at night, all the appellants went to the house of Dileshwar and the complainant, they were armed with sticks, betel axe and caused murder of Bijendra, fatal injuries to Shivmangali, Uday Kumar, Dileshwar, Shahodar Bai and Yuvraj, at that time appellant Bindeshwari who was sitting in driver seat jeep was standing beside the house of the complainant, the caused injury to the complainant party, then they fled from the spot. Injured Uday Kumar (PW-7) went to the police station Jhilmili and lodged merg intimation vide Ex.P/28A. F.I.R. was lodged vide Ex.P/6. Investigating officer proceeded for the scene of occurrence and after summoning the witnesses, inquest over dead body of Bijendra was prepared vide Ex.P/2. Dead body of deceased Bijendra was sent for autopsy to Assistant Surgeon, Primary Health Centre, Bhaiyathan vide Ex.P/3. Dr.Amit Saxena (PW-16) conducted autopsy over the body of deceased Bijendra and found following injuries, i) Incised wound of 4 +" x +" x +" over right side of the head, bone beneath injury was found cut up to 4" and blood was coming from the injury; ii) Incised wound of 1 +" x ," over left palm; iii) Incised wound of 2" x +" x ," over left forearm; Injuries were ante-mortem and death was homicidal in nature. Spot map was prepared by the investigating officer vide Ex.P/25A. Patwari also prepared spot map vide Ex.P/50. Investigating officer seized one box from the house of the complainant vide Ex.P/4. Bloodstained soil, plain soil and bloodstained mat were seized from the spot vide Ex.P/16. One rope was seized from the spot vide Ex.P/17. During the course of investigation, accused persons were taken into custody, accused Hardev @ Bihari made disclosure statement of betel axe vide Ex.P/7 and same was seized vide Ex.P/27. On production of sister of Bijendra namely Moti Bai, one betel axe was seized vide Ex.P/18. One shirt stained with blood was seized from accused Bihari vide Ex.P/8. Accused Ramnarayan made disclosure statement of betel axe vide Ex.P/9 and same was seized at his instance vide Ex.P/10. One shirt and bamboo stick were seized from accused Babulal vide Ex.P/11. Panchnama of garage of accused Bindeshwari was prepared vide Ex.P/12. Dried blood present in the jeep was scratched and seized vide Ex.P/5. Accused Chhannu made disclosure of betel axe & stick vide Ex.P/14 and same were seized at his instance vide Ex.P/15. Jeep found in the garage of accused Bindeshwari bearing registration number MP 27 1975 was seized vide Ex.P/19. Accused Shashibhushan made disclosure statement of betel axe vide Ex.P/20 and same was seized from him vide Ex.P/21. Accused Diwakar made disclosure statement of betel axe vide Ex.P/22 and same was seized at his instance vide Ex.P/23. Shirt of accused Chhannu was seized vide Ex.P/24. During the course of investigation, dying declaration of badly injured Dileshwar was recorded vide Ex.P/25. Accused Bandhu made disclosure statement of stick vide Ex.P/26 and same was recovered at his instance vide Ex.P/33. Torch was seized from the spot vide Ex.P/28. Dhoti was seized from Dileshwar vide Ex.P/34. Sealed articles of the deceased were seized vide Ex.P/35. Injured Shivmangali was sent for medical examination. She was examined by Dr.Amit Saxena (PW-16) vide Ex.P/57 and found following injuries; i) Incised wound of 1 +" x 1" x ," over left side of the chin; ii) Incised wound of 3" x 1 +" x 1" over right breast; iii) Incised wound of 3 +" x 2" x 1" over right forearm; Dr.Amit Saxena has also examined injured Uday Kumar vide Ex.P/58 and found following injuries; i) Incised wound of 2" x +" x ," over right jaw; ii) Lacerated wound of 1 +" x +" x +" over right side of the back; iii) Abrasion of 1" x +" over right breast; iv) Abrasion of 2" x +" over right forearm; Dr.Amit Saxena has also examined Smt.Sahodar Bai vide Ex.P/59 and found following injures: i) Incised wound of 3 +" x 1 +" x 1" on the left cheek; ii) Incised wound 2 +" x +" x ," on the right hand; iii) Lacerated wound of 1" x +" x +" over first finger of the right hand; Dr.Amit Saxena has also examined injured Dileshwar vide Ex.P/60 and found following injuries; i) Lacerated wound of 3" x 1" x 1" over left side of skull, bone beneath injury was found fracture and brain was visible; ii) Lacerated wound of 2" x 1" x +'' over back side of the head; iii) Lacerated wound of 2" x 1" x .5" over back of skull; iv) Lacerated wound 1" x +" x +" over left side of skull; v) Contusion of 4" x 3" over back; vi) Incised wound of 2" x 1" x +" over left arm; Dr.Amit Sexena has also examined injured Yuvraj vide Ex.P/61 and found following injuries; i) Incised wound of 1 +" x +" x +" over left knee; ii) Abrasion of 3" x 1" over left hand; iii) Abrasion of 1" x +" over right palm; iv) Contusion of 2" x 1/2" over right side of the face; v) Abrasion of 1" x +" over forehead. Dr.Amit Saxena has also examined weapons vide Exs.P/63 to P/66. Seized articles were sent for chemical examination vide Ex.P/48A. Bed-head ticket of injured Dileshwar is Ex.P/53. Presence of blood was confirmed on cloth of accused Chhannu, stick recovered from accused Bandhu, betel axe seized from accused Bihari, Chhannu, Ramnarayan, Shashibhushan and Diwakar. 5. Statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as `the Code') and after completion of investigation, charge sheet was filed before the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Surajpur, who in turn committed the case in the Court of Sessions, Ambikapur, from where the 4th Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.C.), Surajpur received the case on transfer for trial. 6. In order to prove the guilt of the accused/appellants, the prosecution has examined as many as 16 witnesses. The accused/appellants were examined under Section 313 of the Code where they denied the circumstances appearing against them and claimed innocence and false implication in the crime in question. They have also examined defence witnesses Tilak Singh (DW-1), Malik Ram (DW-2) and Laxman Koer (PW-3). Tilak Singh (DW-1) has deposed in his evidence that one deep was driver Shivpratap Singh had taken the injured at the instance of injured Yuvraj. Malik Ram (DW-2) has deposed in his evidence that on the morning time he came to know that Bijendra has been murdered, then he went to the house of Yuvraj where he saw dead body of Bijendra lying on the cot with injuries, then he came to know that injured persons were transported by deep driver of Shiv Pratap Singh to hospital. Accused Bindeshwari was also present in the house of complainant Yuvraj till 10 a.m. Laxman (DW-3) has deposed in his evidence that his real brother-in-law's younger brother Bijendra died, then he went to the house of Bijendra where so many persons were present. Accused Bindeshwari was also present there. These defence witnesses have not stated anything substantially except the presence of accused Bindeshwari after the incident on the second day near the place of incident along with other persons. 7. After providing opportunity of hearing to the parties, learned 4th Additional Sessions Judge convicted and sentenced the appellants as aforementioned. 8. We have heard Mr.V.R.Tiwari, counsel for appellant Bindeshwari in Criminal Appeal No.707/2004, Mr.Abhay Tiwari, counsel for Bandhuram and Chhannuram in Criminal Appeal No.994/2004, for appellant Babulal in Criminal Appeal No.758/2004, for appellant Shashibhushan and Diwakar in Criminal Appeal No.737/2004, Dr.Shailesh Ahuja, counsel for appellant No.3-Ramnarayan in Criminal Appeal No.737/2004, Mr.Ashish Shukla, Government Advocate for the State/respondent , perused the judgment impugned and record of the Court below. 9. Mr.V.R.Tiwari, counsel for appellant Bindeshwari vehemently argued that although this is the case of murder and fatal injuries to family members of Dileshwar and the appellant was having inimical terms with the family of Dileshwar, but on account of enmity, liability could not be fastened upon the appellant unless it is proved by cogent evidence. Learned counsel further argued that in the present case, incident took place at about 12.30 at night. As per evidence of injured witnesses, Bindeshwari has not caused any injury to any person, he was sitting in his jeep standing beside the house of the complainant in the driver seat. It appears unnatural that why somebody will seat in the jeep near the house of the complainant when other offenders were of assaulting the complainant party without taking active part in the incident. This evidence itself is unnatural and not reliable. The alleged jeep was seized from garage of appellant Bindeshwari. Dried blood like material were scratched and seized and was sent for chemical examination, but no blood was found in such dried material vide Ex.P/49 which completely rule out the presence of Bindeshwari and his active participation in the incident. 10. Mr.V.R.Tiwari placed reliance in the matter of Pandurang Chandrakant Mhatre v. State of Maharashtra1 in which the Apex Court has held that in case of commission of offence by unlawful assembly, the Court is required to consider their definite common object and common object of the members at the time of commission of offence may be different, there may be the case in which common object of some members would be of commission of culpable homicide amounting to murder and common object of other members may be commission of other offence. The Court is required to consider the particular fact in a situation and convict those whose presence was clearly established and overt acts proved. 11. Dr.Shailesh Ahuja, counsel for appellant-Ram Narayan vehemently argued that no specific role attributed to Ram Narayan has been proved by the prosecution by adducing cogent and reliable evidence. In the present case, place of incident was only 12 kilometers away from the police station. The incident took place at 12.30 at night, but report was lodged at 11 a.m., after lapse of 11.30 hours. Normally the evidence of injured witnesses and relative witnesses cannot be disbelieved, but in case of grave enmity, their evidences require minute scrutiny. In the present case, the prosecution has not explained the delay in lodging such report, especially in case of murder and grave injuries to 6 persons. In the absence of any reliable evidence, conviction & sentence of appellant Ram Narayan is not sustainable under the law. 12. Mr.Abhay Tiwari, counsel for appellants Bandhuram, Chhannuram, Babulal, Shashibhushan and Diwakar vehemently argued that in the present case, conviction is based on the evidence of injured and relatives witnesses having inimical terms with the complainant party. Normally the Court should not disbelieve the evidence of injured witnesses, but in case of enmity between parties, the Court is required to inlay the evidence on the background of inimical terms between the parties and likelihood of false implication in the crime in question. This is the case of murder and fatal injuries to 6 persons. F.I.R. was lodged after lapse of 11.30 hours, but the prosecution has not explained the delay in lodging the F.I.R. Merg intimation Ex.P/28A reveals that Accused Diwakar, Hardev, Shashibhushan and one Mahapatra Brahmin of village Rakda have assaulted the complainant party and Bindeshwari was sitting in his jeep beside the house of the complainant. It shows that only four persons were present at the time of incident. Dileshwar was badly injured and his dying declaration was recorded by Dr.Amit Saxena (PW-16) vide Ex.P/25 which reveals that Shashibhushan, Diwakar and Chhannu were present at the time of incident and have caused injuries which reveals the name of three persons. F.I.R. reveals the names of Bihari @ Hardev, Shashibhushan, Diwakar, Chhanu, Mahapatra Brahmin of village Rakda and Bineshwari sitting in his jeep standing near the house of the complainant. F.I.R. reveals presence of five persons inside the house and accused Bindeshwari outside the house, but finally seven persons have been chargesheeted. Names of Bandhuram, Babulal and Ram Narayan do not find place in any of the document, but the prosecution has made them accused shows that they have been falsely implicated on the ground of their association with Bindeshwari. 13. On the other hand, learned State counsel supported the judgment and argued that in the present case on account of enmity with Bindeshwari, Bindeshwari and other accused persons came into house of the complainant at about 12.30 at night, their presence on the spot were not natural, they entered into house of the complainant and have assaulted as many as 7 members of the family including murder of Bijendra. Virtually they have caused injuries to almost all members of the family who were sleeping in their house at night, they came by jeep and they fled from the spot by jeep of Bindeshwari, they were holding betel axe and sticks which show their grave intention of commission of murder and fatal injuries to the complainant party on account of enmity. They have formed unlawful assembly having its common object of commission of murder and fatal injuries to complainant party and in furtherance of common object of unlawful assembly, accused persons have committed murder and fatal injuries to the complainant party. In these circumstances, once formation of unlawful assembly with its common object is proved, no proof of overt act is necessary. In case of injury caused by the members of unlawful assembly by so many members by different object, detail description about the injuries, weapons used and who have caused injury on which part of body to whom is not possible. The prosecution witnesses are required to depose clearly that who were the persons, what weapons they were holding and who are the injured. In the present case, the prosecution witnesses have clearly proved the aforesaid fact. 14. Learned counsel for the respondent placed reliance in the matter of Yunis alias Kariya etc. v. State of Madhya Pradesh2 in which the Apex Court has held that presence of accused as part of unlawful assembly is sufficient and no proof of overt act is necessary. Learned counsel further placed reliance in the matter of Dani Singh and others v. State of Bihar3 in which the Apex Court has held that the evidence of friend and relatives cannot be discarded and the Court is required to scrutinize evidence carefully. In the absence of fact that some members of unlawful assembly dissuaded other accused persons from committing criminal act or withdrew during the course of incident of the members, unlawful assembly would be liable for commission of the offence and no proof of overt act is necessary. Learned counsel also placed reliance in the matter of Chandra Bihari Gautam and others v. State of Bihar4 in which the Apex Court has held that common object can develop on the spot. Existence of common object has to be ascertained in the facts and circumstances of each case. Learned counsel placed reliance in the matter of Bishna alias Bhiswadeb Mahato and others v. State of W.B.5 in which the Apex Court has held that it is not necessary that there should be a pre-concert by way of a meeting of the persons of the unlawful assembly as to the common object. If a common object is adopted by all persons and shared by them it would serve the purpose. 15. In order to appreciate the arguments advanced on behalf of the parties, we have examined the material available on record. In the present case, culpable homicide amounting to murder of deceased Bijendra has not been substantially disputed on behalf of the appellants, on the other hand, otherwise also established by the evidence of Dr.Amit Saxena (PW-16) and autopsy report Ex.P/62 which reveals that fatal injuries were found over the head of the deceased and death was homicidal in nature. Injury for attempt to commit murder of Dileshwar and injury by sharp edged weapons to Shivmangali, Uday Kumar, Sohgar Bai and Yuvraj have also not been substantially disputed on behalf of the appellants, same are also established by the evidence of Dr.Amit Saxena (PW- 16) and injury reports Exs.P/58 to P/61. 16. As regards the complicity of the accused/appellants in the crime in question, in the present case, conviction is based on the evidence of eyewitness/injured witness Yuvraj Kushwaha (PW-6) who has deposed in his evidence that on account of the land dispute, appellant Bindeshwari was having enmity with them and has threatened him through his persons including accused Bihari, he used to demand will deed executed by his mother's sister's husband Sirdar Ram on the ground that after death of Sirdar Ram, his wife Nanki Bai has executed will in favour of accused Bindeshwari and his brother Vinod. Civil suit was filed and was pending before the Court. At the time of incident, he was sleeping in his room at about 12.30 at night, his wife awaked him that somebody has thrown torch light, he woke up and put on the light, then he saw accused Bihari, Chhannu, Ramnarayan and one other person were present there, they entered into his room and tied with rope, accused Ramnarayan assaulted him by betel axe on his left leg, his wife Shivmangali tried to save him, then Bindeshwari assaulted her on her chest and cheek by betel axe. After hearing crises, his father Dileshwar, mother Sohgar Bai, brother Bijendra, nephew Uday Kumar which were sleeping different part of the house came to save them, then anyhow he removed rope and hidden himself in the room. After sometime when he came out from the room then he saw that appellant Shashibhushan, Diwakar, Chhannu, Bandhu, Babulal, Ram Narayan, Bihari, Bindeshwari and one other person Mahapatra of Rakda were assaulting his father Dileshwar, mother Sohgar and nephew Uday Kumar by betel axe and again he hidden in the cattle room. Bihari and Bindeshwari went out from the house and were telling about the will deed, then he also went out from his house by other gate, he took kudari for his safety. He shouted for calling the villagers. After sometime Uday Kumar also met him who told that Bindeshwari was sitting in the jeep bearing registration number M.P. 27/1975 beside their house. Dharmu, Baban and Ramprasad were coming towards his house whom he told the incident, he came along with them in his house, then he saw dead body of Bijendra and injury to his father, mother and his wife. Shivmangali (PW-10) has substantially corroborated his evidence and has deposed that the appellants have caused injuries to them and she was present in her house. Smt.Sohgar (PW-2), mother of Yuvraj, has also substantially corroborated the evidence of Yuvraj. Injured witness Dileshwar (PW-5) has also substantially corroborated the evidence of Yuvraj and has deposed that Shashibhushan assaulted him by betel axe and chased Bijendra, then Bindeshwari restrained him, then Bihari came with betel axe and assaulted over his head, Bijendra fell down. Uday Kumar (PW-7) another injured witness has also substantially corroborated the evidence of Yuvraj and has deposed that when he came out from the house, he saw that Bindeshwari was sitting in his jeep and he fled towards the village. Her mother Motibai also followed her and told that Bindeshwari was causing assault and he is standing in second gate, he was holding betel axe, her mother Motibai went towards village and she was shouting for help. Smt.Moti (PW-3) has also corroborated the evidence of Yuvraj and other eyewitnesses. 17. Babanram Kushwaha (PW-1) has deposed that at about 1 a.m. he heard sound coming towards the house of Bijendra, he proceeded towards the house of Biijendra, Yuvraj met in a way and told that Bindeshwari, Bihari, Chhannu, Babulal, Shashibhushan, Diwakar and one Mahapatra were assaulting them. He along with Dharmu, Ramprasad and Phulsai went to the house of Vijendra, house of Bijendra was opened, Bijendra was present, he was badly injured. On being asked he told that he was assaulted by Shashi, Diwakar and Bhushan and other accused persons. They immediately took him to hospital, but the doctor refused to treat and directed to take him to Bhaiyathan, then they took Bijendra to Bhaiyathan hospital. Uday went to police station for lodging the report. Meanwhile Bijendra died. Rampyare (PW-13) has also deposed that he heard crises of quarrel and weeping. After sometime when the assailants fled from the spot, then he went to the house of Yuvraj along with Phulsai, Baban and Dharmu where he saw blood all around house. Bijendra was badly injured, Dileshwar was injured, wife of Yuvraj was injured, Bijendra told him that Shashibhushan, Diwakar and Bihari have assaulted him. After sometime he died. On the second day morning, Uday went to the police station for lodging the report. 18. Baban Ram (PW-1) and Rampyare (PW-13) are the persons who have heard sound of quarrel and weeping, they went to the house of the complainant party, Bijendra was lying at that time, he told them that Shashibhushan, Diwakar and Bihari had assaulted him. Dileshwar (PW-5) who has told the names of the assailants to the doctor in his dying declaration/previous statement Ex.P/25 as Shashibhushan, Bihari, Diwakar and Chhanu. Yuvraj (PW-2), Uday Kumar (PW-7) and Shivmangali (PW-1) are injured witnesses whose injuries have been proved by Dr.Amit Saxena (PW-16). All were having multiple injuries especially along with incised wounds. They have deposed that that the aforesaid appellants have caused fatal injuries to them. Smt.Moti (PW-3) who was also present in the house of the complainant has also corroborated the evidence of injured witnesses. Definitely they are relatives and they were having inimical terms of Bindeshwari on account of the land dispute with Yuvraj, but their evidences cannot be discarded only on the ground of their relation. 19. As held by the Apex Court in the matter of Chandra Bihari Gautam and others (supra), merely because overt act had not been attributed to each of the accused members of the unlawful assembly, it cannot be held that charge under Section 149 has not been proved. Common object can develop on the spot. 20. While dealing with the question of evidentiary value of injured and interested witnesses, the Apex Court in the matter of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra6 held that in view of the close relationship and affection any person related to the deceased would have, such a witness would naturally have a tendency to exaggerate or add facts which may not have been stated to them at all. Not that this is done consciously but even unconsciously the love and affection for the deceased would create a psychological hatred against the supposed murderer and, therefore, the Court has to examine such evidence with very great care and caution. Para 48 of the said judgment reads as under:- "48. Before discussing the evidence of the witnesses we might mention a few preliminary remarks against the background of which the oral statements are to be considered. All persons to whom the oral statements are said to have been made by Manju when she visited Beed for the last time, are close relatives and friends of the deceased. In view of the close relationship and affection any person in the position of the witness would naturally have a tendency to exaggerate or add facts which may not have been stated to them at all. Not that this is done consciously but even unconsciously the love and affection for the deceased would create a psychological hatred against the supposed murderer and, therefore, the Court has to examine such evidence with very great care and caution. Even if the witnesses were speaking a part of the truth or perhaps the whole of it, they would be guided by a spirit of revenge or nemesis against the accused person and in this process certain facts which may not or could not have been stated may be imagined to have been stated unconsciously by the witnesses in order to see that the offender is punished. This is human psychology and no one can help it." 21. In case of inimical, interested, relatives, injured and chance witnesses, their statements cannot be discarded and rejected and it only requires minute scrutiny before relying the same. These injured relatives are residing under the same roof, their presence at the time of incident were natural, they have narrated the incident to other villagers while they went to call villagers i.e. other witnesses Babanram Kushwaha Ram (PW-1) and Rampyare (PW-13) have specifically deposed that they have heard sound of quarrel, even Yuvraj told Baban that Bindeshwari, Bihari, Chhannu, Babulal, Shashibhushan, Diwakar and one Mahapatra are assaulting them, then they immediately reached to the house of Yuvraj where they found injured persons. The house was stained with blood. It shows that these evidences are sufficient to establish the fact that other persons or unknown persons have not assaulted and caused injuries to injured persons and present appellants have not been falsely implicated on the ground of enmity. 22. In the present case, admittedly F.I.R. was lodged after lapse of 11.30 hours. Virtually all members of the family were having injuries including fatal injuries to Dileshwar, father of Yuvraj and fatal injuries resulting into death of Bijendra. Dead body of Bijendra was lying in his house shows that virtually nobody was in a position to go to police station at night for lodging the report, especially when the persons came to their house and caused serious injuries to almost all members of the family including murder of Bijendra. This is not the case where incident first time came into the knowledge of other persons at about 11 a.m. after lapse of 11.30 hours, but, in the present case, the incident and names of the assailants came to the knowledge of the villagers within few minutes of the incident. In the present case, delay in lodging the F.I.R. was natural and is not fatal to the prosecution. Defence has cross-examined these witnesses at length. There are some contradictions and omissions in their evidences, but they are consistent in their evidence that these accused persons were present, Bindeshwari was thrown light from torch, Bindeshwari was initially sitting in the jeep beside their house and the appellants fled from the spot by the said jeep. F.I.R. Ex.P/6 lodged by Uday Kumar clearly reveals the presence of Bindeshwari. Merg intimation Ex.P/28A also reveals presence of Bindeshwari, therefore, only on account of presence at the time of investigation is not sufficient to absolve him from the commission of the offence. The evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution clearly shows that he was Sarpanch of the village, therefore, he has not chosen to abscond and to create adverse circumstances against him. 23. Definitely, there is conflict in F.I.R. Ex.P/6, merg intimation Ex.P/28A alleged dying declaration Ex.P/25. Ex.P/25 is alleged dying declaration which becomes previous statement of Dileshwar reveals that Dileshwar has made statement that who has assaulted and who were present in his house. As per Ex.P/25, Shashibhushan, Diwakar and Chhannu were present in the house and Shashibhushan has assaulted him by betel axe. He has not stated that other accused persons were not present. He has not stated about the injuries of other complainant and who had assaulted them. He has deposed only relating to his injuries. He was badly injured and it was not possible for him to state details of the incident, but only on the ground of his previous statement Ex.P/25, his entire evidence given by him when he became normal cannot be discarded or rejected. 24. Definitely, there are some contradictions and omissions including exaggerations in their evidence, but only on the ground of contradictions, omissions and exaggerations their evidences cannot be discarded or rejected. In case of exaggerations, omissions, contradictions and partial false evidence, the Court is required to scrutinize the evidence and must make an attempt to separate grain from the chaff, the truth from the falsehood. 25. While dealing with the question of reliability of the evidence of the person who has exaggerated and patiently given false statement up to some extent, the Apex Court in the matter of Laxman and others v. State of Maharashtra7 has held that witnesses cannot be branded as liars in toto and their testimony rejected outright even if parts of their statements are demonstrable incorrect or doubtful. Relevant portion reads as under: "Before we discuss the evidence further, we may observe that Professor Munsterberg in a book called "On the Witness Stand" (p.51), "Law and the Modern Mind" (see: 1949 ed. P.106) gives instances of experiments conducted by enacting sudden unexpected preplanned episodes before persons who were then asked to write down, soon afterwards, what they had seen and heard. The astounding result was: "Words were put into the mouths of men who had been silent spectators during the whole short episode; actions were attributed to the chief participants of which not the slightest trace existed; and essential parts of the tragic-comedy were completely eliminated from the memory of a number of witnesses". Hence, the Professor concluded: "We never know, or imagine". Witnesses can not, therefore, be branded as liars in toto and their testimony rejected outright even if parts of their statements are demonstrably incorrect or doubtful. The astute judge can separate the grains of acceptable truth from the chaff of exaggerations and improbabilities which cannot be safely or prudently accepted or acted upon. It is sound commonsense to refuse to apply mechanically, in assessing the worth of necessarily imperfect human testimony, the maxim: "falsus in uno falsus in omnibus" 26. The evidences of the aforesaid witnesses reveals that all the persons were present in the house of the complainant party, they were having deadly weapons, they have assaulted the complainant party. Their presence in the house of the complainant at 12.30 at night were not natural, they came by jeep and fled from the spot by the said jeep which Bindeshwari was having and they have caused injures and murder of Bijendra. 27. Constitution of unlawful assembly is a question of fact and the prosecution is required to prove constitution of unlawful assembly and its common object. Unlawful assembly may be constituted at any moment and person may join unlawful assembly at any time, even at the time of causing injury, but the prosecution is required to prove the aforesaid fact by adducing cogent and reliable evidence that the persons have formed the unlawful assembly or joined in unlawful assembly having its common object and was having its common object for commission of the aforesaid offence. Mere presence as a stranger, by passer or gathered on the spot to see quarrel or the incident would not make the person liable for formation of unlawful assembly or liable for the commission of offence. 28. While dealing with the question of formation of unlawful assembly, the Apex Court in the matter of Chandra Bihari Gautam & others (supra)4 has held that unlawful assembly may be constituted at any moment and even assembled of accused, but the existence of the common object of the unlawful assembly has to be ascertained in the facts and circumstances of each case. Para 6 of the said judgment reads as under: "6.It has been argued alternatively that even if the occurrence is held to have taken place in the manner alleged by the prosecution and the accused persons were seen on spot, they cannot be convicted and sentenced as the prosecution allegedly failed to establish the accused persons. Section 149 is an exception to the criminal law whereunder a person can be convicted and sentenced for his vicarious liability only on proof of his being a member of the unlawful assembly, sharing the common object, notwithstanding as to whether he had actually participated in the commission of the crime or not. Common object does not require prior concert and a common meeting of minds before the attack. An unlawful object can develop after the accused assembled. The existence of the common object of the unlawful assembly has to be ascertained in the facts and circumstances of each case. It is true that the mere presence of the accused is not sufficient to hold them guilty for the sharing of common object as the prosecution has to further established that they were not mere by-standers but in fact were sharing the common object. When a concerted attack is made by a large number of persons, it is often difficult to determine the actual part played by each of the accused but on that account, for an offence committed by a member of the unlawful assembly in the prosecution of the common object or for an offence which was known to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object, persons provide to be members cannot escape the consequences arising from the doing of that act which amounts to an offence. There may not be a common object in a sudden fight but in a planned attack on the victim, the presence of the common object amongst the persons forming the unlawful assembly can be inferred." 29. While dealing with same question, the Apex Court in the matter of Pandurang Chandrakant Mhatre (supra)1 has held that conduct of each member of unlawful assembly before and at the time of attack is relevant consideration. Object of unlawful assembly is a question of fact which has to be determined keeping in view nature of assembly, arms carried by members, and behavior of members at or near scene of incident. Mere presence on the spot will not make the person liable for commission of the offence with aid of Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code. 30. While dealing with same question, the Apex Court in the matter of Masalti v. State of U.P.8 has held in para 17 as under:- "17....What has to be proved against a person who is alleged to be a member of an unlawful assembly is that he was one of the persons constituting the assembly and he entertained along with the other members of the assembly the common object as defined by Section 141 IPC. Section 142 provides that whoever, being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly, intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful assembly. In other words, an assembly of five or more persons actuated by, and entertaining one or more of the common objects specified by the five clauses of Section 141 , is an unlawful assembly. The crucial question to determine in such a case is whether the assembly consisted of five or more persons and whether the said persons entertained one or more of the common objects as specified by Section 141. While determining this question, it becomes relevant to consider whether the assembly consisted of some persons who were merely passive witnesses and had joined the assembly as a matter of idle curiosity without intending to entertain the common object of the assembly." 31. While dealing with same question, the Apex Court in the matter of Sherey and others v. State of U.P.9 has held in para 4 as under:- "4. ...But when there is a general allegation against a large number of persons the Court naturally hesitates to convict all of them on such vague evidence. Therefore we have to find some reasonable circumstance which lends assurance. From that point of view it is safe only to convict the abovementioned nine accused whose presence is not only consistently mentioned from the stage of FIR but also to whom over acts are attributed..." 32. While dealing with the question of need of overt act or active participation of member of unlawful assembly, the Apex Court in the matter of Lalji and others v. State of U.P.10 (supra) has held that once formation of unlawful assembly is established, then no overt act or active participation of any member of unlawful assembly is required and mere meeting of five or more persons for carrying out common object involving reasonable apprehension of violence, even without doing any overt act is sufficient to constitute offence. Paras 8 and 9 of the said judgment read as under:- "8. Section 149 IPC provides that if an offence is committed by any member of an unlawful assembly in prosecution of the common object of that assembly, or such as the members of the assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object, every person, who at the time of committing of that offence is a member of the same assembly, is guilty of that offence. As has been defined in Section 141 IPC, an assembly of five or more persons is designated an "Unlawful Assembly", if the common object of the persons composing that assembly is to do any act or acts stated in clauses "First", "Second", "Third", "Fourth", and "Fifth" of that section. An assembly, as the explanation to the section says, which was not unlawful when it assembled, may subsequently become an unlawful assembly. Whoever being aware of facts which render any assembly an unlawful assembly intentionally joins that assembly, or continues in it, is said to be a member of an unlawful assembly. Thus, whenever so many as five or more persons meet together to support each other, even against opposition, in carrying out the common object which is likely to involve violence or to produce in the minds of rational and firm men any reasonable apprehension of violence, then even though they ultimately depart without doing anything whatever towards carrying out their common object, the mere fact of their having thus met will constitute an offence. Of course, the alarm must not be merely such as would frighten any foolish or timid person, but must be such as would alarm persons of reasonable firmness and courage. The two essentials of the section are the commission of an offence by any member of an unlawful assembly and that such offence must have been committed in prosecution of the common object of that assembly or must be such as the members of that assembly knew to be likely to be committed. Not every person is necessarily guilty but only those who share in the common object. The common object of the assembly must be one of the five objects mentioned in Section 141 IPC. Common object of the unlawful assembly can be gathered from the nature of the assembly, arms used by them and the behaviour of the assembly at or before scene of occurrence. It is an inference to be deduced from the facts and circumstances of each case. 9. Section 149 makes every member of an unlawful assembly at the time of committing of the offence guilty of that offence. Thus this section created a specific and distinct offence. In other words, it created a constructive or vicarious liability of the members of the unlawful assembly for the unlawful acts committed pursuant to the common object by any other member of that assembly. However, the vicarious liability of the members of the unlawful assembly extends only to the acts done in pursuance of the common objects of the unlawful assembly, or to such offences as the members of the unlawful assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object. Once the case of a person falls within the ingredients of the section the question that he did nothing with his own hands would be immaterial. He cannot put forward the defence that he did not with his own hand commit the offence committed in prosecution of the common object of the unlawful assembly or such as the members of the assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of that object. Everyone must be taken to have intended the probable and natural results of the combination of the acts in which he joined. It is not necessary that all the persons forming an unlawful assembly must do some overt act. When the accused persons assembled together, armed with lathis, and were parties to the assault on the complainant party, the prosecution is not obliged to prove which specific overt act was done by which of the accused. This section makes a member of the unlawful assembly responsible as a principal for the acts of each, and all, merely because he is a member of an unlawful assembly. While overt act and active participation may indicate common intention of the person perpetrating the crime, the mere presence in the unlawful assembly may fasten vicariously criminal liability under Section 149 . It must be noted that the basis of the constructive guilt under Section 149 is mere membership of the unlawful assembly, with the requisite common object or knowledge." 33. While dealing with the question of intention/common object of unlawful assembly, the Apex Court in the matter of State of U.P. v. Dan Singh and others11 has held that intent of members of assaulting party can be gathered from number and nature of injuries and arms used by them. An assembly which is initially lawful may subsequently become unlawful. Paras 30 and 31 of the said judgment read as under:- "30.From the aforesaid facts, as found by the High Court, let us examine whether there existed any unlawful assembly and what was its common object. It is possible that there was no unlawful assembly in existence at the time when the "doli" was stopped. Nevertheless as per the evidence of all the eyewitnesses, a large number of villagers had gathered there and they had with them lathis and sticks. According to the explanation to Section 141 IPC an assembly which is not unlawful when it assembles may subsequently become an unlawful assembly. As observed by this Court in Lalji v. State of U.P. {(1989) 1 SCC 437 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 211} "that common object of the unlawful assembly can be gathered from the nature of the assembly, arms used by them and the behaviour of the assembly at or before the scene of occurrence. It is an inference to be deduced from the facts and circumstances of each case". What has happened in the present case is precisely what has been envisaged in the explanation to Section 141 IPC. With Khima Nand being injured, all hell broke loose. A cry was raised that the Doms should be burnt and killed, and this is precisely what happened. The marriage party was assaulted by the villagers. Six of the members of the marriage party were burnt, five of them having been locked inside the house of the only Dom resident of the village whose house was also burnt. Eight others were pursued and then mercilessly beaten and were killed elsewhere in the village. We fail to appreciate how anyone, under the circumstances, can possibly come to the conclusion that an unlawful assembly having the common object of killing the Doms did not exist when fourteen people have been killed without the use of any weapon more lethal than a stick or stone. Considering the number of injuries on the persons who had died, it is evident that a large number of persons must have taken part in the assault. Even if the assembly of villagers was initially lawful, the same, undoubtedly, became unlawful when the riot started after Khima Nand was injured. All the eyewitnesses have said that fifty or more villagers had taken part in the attack. Who were members of the assembly will be considered later but what is relevant to note is that a large number of villagers were present, duly armed with lathis and sticks, when the occurrence started and except six people who were burnt, eight others were beaten to death by blows from lathis, sticks and stones. It is difficult to appreciate the conclusion of the High Court that, under the circumstances, the attackers probably had a similar object but not a common object. 31.It was sought to be contended that there is nothing to show that the unlawful assembly continued to exist during the course of the entire incident. It is not possible to accept this considering that when all that remained in the village, of the marriage party, were fourteen corpses. It is only those members of the marriage party who had run away were able to save their lives. The only conclusion which we can arrive at, in the instant case, is that there was an unlawful assembly which attacked the marriage party and which had the common object of killing them, and they succeeded in their endeavour to a large extent." 34. While dealing with the question of common object and necessity of overt act of members of unlawful assembly, the Apex Court in the matter of Gangadhar Behera and others v. State of Orissa12 has held that evidence relating to common object generally not available and same has to be gathered from the act committed and result therefrom. Likewise once assembly is formed, then overt act of any member of assembly is not assembled and even an assembly which is initially lawful may subsequently become unlawful. Paras 22, 23 and 24 of the said judgment read as under:- "22.Another plea which was emphasized relates to the question whether Section 149 IPC has any application for fastening the constructive liability which is the sine qua non for its operation. The emphasis is on the common object and not on common intention. Mere presence in an unlawful assembly cannot render a person liable unless there was a common object and he was actuated by that common object and that object is one of those set out in Section 141 . Where common object of an unlawful assembly is not proved, the accused persons cannot be convicted with the help of Section 149 . The crucial question to determine is whether the assembly consisted of five or more persons and whether the said persons entertained one or more of the common objects, as specified in Section 141 . It cannot be laid down as a general proposition of law that unless an overt act is proved against a person, who is alleged to be a member of an unlawful assembly, it cannot be said that he is a member of an assembly. The only thing required is that he should have understood that the assembly was unlawful and was likely to commit any of the acts which fall within the purview of Section 141 . The word "object" means the purpose or design and, in order to make it "common", it must be shared by all. In other words, the object should be common to the persons, who compose the assembly, that is to say, they should all be aware of it and concur in it. A common object may be formed by express agreement after mutual consultation, but that is by no means necessary. It may be formed at any stage by all or a few members of the assembly and the other members may just join and adopt it. Once formed, it need not continue to be the same. It may be modified or altered or abandoned at any stage. The expression "in prosecution of common object" as appearing in Section 149 have to be strictly construed as equivalent to "in order to attain the common object"? It must be immediately connected with the common object by virtue of the nature of the object. There must be community of object and the object may exist only up to a particular stage, and not thereafter. Members of an unlawful assembly may have community of object up to a certain point beyond which they may differ in their objects and the knowledge, possessed by each member of what is likely to be committed in prosecution of their common object may vary not only according to the information at his command, but also according to the extent to which he shares the community of object, and as a consequence of this the effect of Section 149 IPC may be different on different members of the same assembly. 23."Common object" is different from a "common intention" as it does not require a prior concert and a common meeting of minds before the attack. It is enough if each has the same object in view and their number is five or more and that they act as an assembly to achieve that object. The "common object" of an assembly is to be ascertained from the acts and language of the members composing it, and from a consideration of all the surrounding circumstances. It may be gathered from the course of conduct adopted by the members of the assembly. What the common object of the unlawful assembly is at a particular stage of the incident is essentially a question of fact to be determined, keeping in view the nature of the assembly, the arms carried by the members, and the behaviour of the members at or near the scene of the incident. It is not necessary under law that in all cases of unlawful assembly, with an unlawful common object, the same must be translated into action or be successful. Under the Explanation to Section 141 , an assembly which was not unlawful when it was assembled, may subsequently become unlawful. It is not necessary that the intention or the purpose, which is necessary to render an assembly an unlawful one comes into existence at the outset. The time of forming an unlawful intent is not material. An assembly which, at its commencement or even for some time thereafter, is lawful, may subsequently become unlawful. In other words it can develop during the course of incident on the spot eo instanti. 24. Section 149 IPC consists of two parts. The first part of the section means that the offence to be committed in prosecution of the common object must be one which is committed with a view to accomplish the common object. In order that the offence may fall within the first part, the offence must be connected immediately with the common object of the unlawful assembly of which the accused was a member. Even if the offence committed is not in direct prosecution of the common object of the assembly, it may yet fall under Section 141 , if it can be held that the offence was such as the members knew was likely to be committed and this is what is required in the second part of the section. The purpose for which the members of the assembly set out or desired to achieve is the object. If the object desired by all the members is the same, the knowledge that is the object which is being pursued is shared by all the members and they are in general agreement as to how it is to be achieved and that is now the common object of the assembly. An object is entertained in the human mind, and it being merely a mental attitude, no direct evidence can be available and, like intention, has generally to be gathered from the act which the person commits and the result therefrom. Though no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down under the circumstances from which the common object can be culled out, it may reasonably be collected from the nature of the assembly, arms it carries and behaviour at or before or after the scene of incident. The word "knew" used in the second branch of the section implies something more than a possibility and it cannot be made to bear the sense of "might have been known". Positive knowledge is necessary. When an offence is committed in prosecution of the common object, it would generally be an offence which the members of the unlawful assembly knew was likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object. That, however, does not make the converse proposition true; there may be cases which would come within the second part but not within the first part. The distinction between the two parts of Section 149 cannot be ignored or obliterated. In every case it would be an issue to be determined, whether the offence committed falls within the first part or it was an offence such as the members of the assembly knew to be likely to be committed in prosecution of the common object and falls within the second part. However, there may be cases which would be within the first, offences committed in prosecution of the common object would be generally, if not always, within the second, namely, offences which the parties knew were likely to be committed in the prosecution of the common object. (See Chikkarange Gowda v. State of Mysore , AIR 1956 SC 731 : 1956 Cri LJ 1365.)" 35. In the light of law as propounded by the Apex Court in the aforesaid cases, for constitution of unlawful assembly, five or more than five members are required, their common objects must be for commission of the offence as envisaged in Section 141 of the Indian Penal Code. An assembly constituted lawful may be converted into unlawful assembly at any moment. Normally the evidence relating to common object of unlawful assembly is not possible. It may be inferred from the act committed by the unlawful assembly and if result of such act is once proved that the unlawful assembly has been constituted, any overt act or active participation of any member of unlawful assembly is not necessary. All members would be liable for commission of offence or for the act committed by any member of unlawful assembly in accordance with Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code. 36. On close scrutiny of the evidence of the aforesaid witnesses, it is clearly established that all the appellants were present in the house of Yuvraj at 12.30 at night, they were holding deadly weapons, they fled by jeep of Bindeshwari which he was having, they have assaulted as many as 7 members including causing death of Bijendra. Huge numbers of injuries were found over the bodies of injured persons. It shows that they have formed unlawful assembly, they were armed with deadly weapons, they have common object of unlawful assembly first to commit murder of Bijendra and caused fatal injuries to other complainants and in furtherance of common object of unlawful assembly they have committed murder and fatal injuries to other complainants. 37. As held by the Apex Court in the matter of Pandurang Chandrakant Mhatre (supra)1, some persons have chased the deceased and committed murderous assault on him resulting in his death but others have not acted in such a manner, therefore, the act of others and common object of others was distinguishable from common object of the persons who have chased and committed murderous assault on the deceased. In the present case, all the persons came into the house of the complainant. This is not the case in which the accused party made the complainant party in a way or any public place or both the parties quarreled, then offence took place in which there may be the case that initially common object of unlawful assembly was different, but subsequently it was turned for different object. The fact of the case of Pandurang Chandrakant Mhatre (supra) is distinguishable to that of the present case. 38. As held by the Apex Court in the matter of Yunis alias Kariya (supra)2, if the presence of the accused in the unlawful assembly is proved, then overt act of the accused is not required to prove for convicting the accused with the aid of Section 149 of the Indian Penal Code. In the present case, the prosecution has proved the presence and active participation of the appellants in the commission of the offence. 39. As held by the Apex Court in the matter of Chandra Bihari Gautam (supra)4, the accused came to the house of the complainant at night with deadly weapons this fact is sufficient for drawing inference for common object of such assembly and knowledge to all members relating to common object. 40. The prosecution has not collected huge numbers of independent witnesses, but Babanram Kushwaha (PW-1) and Rampyare (PW-13) have substantially corroborated the evidence of interested witnesses. The prosecution has proved formation of unlawful assembly and the act attributed to the appellants. 41. After appreciating the evidence available on record, learned 4th Additional Sessions Judge has convicted and sentenced the appellants as aforementioned. The evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution is sufficient to establish the fact that both the parties were having enmity and the appellants were present in the house of the complainant party at 12.30 at night. There is no propriety for their presence, that too with deadly weapons and causing injuries to seven persons including murder of Bijendra. The complainant party has not caused any injury to the accused party and the accused party fled from the spot by jeep which Bindeshwari was having shows that appellant Bindeshwari was master-mind of the case and at his instance, incident took place. The Court below has rightly convicted and sentenced the appellants as aforementioned. 42. On close scrutiny of the evidence, we do not find any illegality in the judgment impugned warranting any interference. The appeals being devoid of merits are liable to be dismissed and are hereby dismissed. Appellants Babulal, Bandhuram and Ram Narayan are on bail, they shall surrender themselves before the 4th Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.C.), Surajpur or before its successor in office in Sessions Trial No.122/1994, judgment dated 17.8.2004 for serving remaining part of sentence imposed upon them. J U D G E